All right, folks. Welcome. It's uh this
is the Board of Finance special budget
meeting on
May 6th,
7:02. We're going to call this thing to
order. Oh, there's Kim. I'm admitting
her now.
>> Okay.
>> All right. We'll start with the pledge
of allegiance. Uh, I pledge allegiance
to the flag of the United States of
America and to the republic for which it
stands, one nation under God,
indivisible,
liberty and justice for all.
>> Okay. So, as we've just been chatting
about, we have public speak to get
through. Again, I'll just add if you
could keep it tight, it would be
appreciated. There's a lot of people on
here. We have, you know, like 30 people
here. So, let's go. Let's start. I'm
just going to go down my list here.
First, I have Alex.
You'll need to unmute yourself, Alex.
>> All right.
Going once, going twice. I may have to
come back to you. Okay. Diane Chet.
>> Good evening, everyone. I'll keep it
quick. Um, just want to say this current
budget that was presented that failed at
referendum was like the largest increase
we've had in a extremely long time. So I
am for all for reducing the budget
significantly. I would expect to see the
school come in around four or 5%
increase and the town no more than 3%.
That's my two cents. Thank you.
>> Thanks for your comments,
Diane Grineer.
Um, I really have nothing to add. Just
uh good luck and God speed.
>> Thank you,
>> Eric Nuns or Nunes. I apologize. I'm not
sure.
>> That's okay. Thank you. Um, as always, I
just want to thank the boards for your
um for your work on the budgets and
throughout the year. Um, I emailed all
the boards earlier, so you know my
thoughts already, but just to make it
public, um, I would, um, appreciate not
any drastic cuts. Um, as I mentioned in
the letter, um, Hein really voted down
the all their budgets. So, they're going
to be looking at making cuts and I
anticipate Ram will have to make a deep
cut. I've heard Hebrin's looking at Ram
to make a 0% increase, which will bring
down the Andover share considerably. Um,
so I would really appreciate if we
didn't make any drastic cuts tonight.
kind of see what happens um next Tuesday
with Ram's budget and then um go from
there. And as I mentioned in my letter,
I want us to all realize that our taxes
are lower than they were 3 years ago. So
just to kind of keep that in mind, too.
Thank you.
>> Thank you,
Elizabeth Partridge.
>> Well, I don't know about everyone else's
taxes, but my taxes aren't any lower
than they were two years ago. But that's
a side note. Um uh I appreciate all the
work that you guys are doing and um I I
agree that we need to make some drastic
cuts or we're going to be back in this
cycle multiple times.
That's it.
Okay. I'm going to come back and see if
Alex is available at this point. Alex,
do you want to speak?
>> Uh yes, thank you so much. Uh nothing
else to add, just that uh would
appreciate more transparency in terms of
budget cuts. Um and hoping to be around
that limited increase, if any increase
at all. Thank you. Appreciate everything
you guys do.
>> Scott,
I'm good for now. Thank you, sir. Very
good.
Jeff Murray,
>> I'm good. I'm just listening.
>> All right. Thank you,
Jen Mcoldendrick.
>> I'm just here in support of the school.
That's all. Thank you.
>> Thank you, Jenny Morell.
>> Same thing as Jen in support of the
school. Thank you.
>> Very good. Thank you.
Joanne.
>> Hi everyone. I'll be real quick. I think
we knew this day was probably coming. I
know a lot of you were reticent to make
any major cuts or really too many cuts
at all until you got the opinion from
the town people and now I think they
have spoken all across the board. You
know, it was nice to see Diane Shet, a
former board of finance member there
today. you know, we did used to do a lot
a lot of work. Um, so please dissect
everything. Um, every time I've always
seen a surplus every year, so know that
even if you made a deep cut somewhere,
you'll probably be able to fix it by
transferring some money in. Number two
is I've been um, you know, kind of on
board with maybe cutting some of the
capital funds just this year. You can
always refund them another year just to
help in that way. We've got a lot of
money. Those are like those little bank
accounts, so they're adding up. You
know, some can't be cut, but some can.
And then lastly, I had sent you a long
email um outlining some salary concerns
that I had just, you know, hoping that
those had time to be checked in so that
we have accurate information that you're
starting with and then possibly if
you're adding new positions and salary
lines, there's no need to keep those
stipens there. So, there's a cut that
could be made. Thank you.
Thank you for that.
>> Now, where am I? Jody,
>> you're muted.
>> Sorry, I was trying to do it. I'm I'm
just here to listen and uh thank you for
your continued work and uh for support
of our students.
>> Thank you. Uh Kathy, there's two
Kathies. So just the one that just has a
Kathy.
>> I'm just listening. Thank you.
>> Very good. Thanks. Kathy Harnett
Hartnet.
>> Yep. I'm here in support of the school.
Thank you.
>> Very good. Thank you, Katie Dixon.
>> Here in support of the school. Thank
you.
>> Okay, Kelsey.
Kelsey going once, going twice.
>> Here to listen. Sorry.
>> No worries.
Understood. Uh, Linda Derek,
Linda, Derek.
I'll pass over and go to Linda Fish
then.
Hi. All set. Just here to listen.
>> Thank you, ma'am. Ameritus member.
>> Lisa, our treasurer is here. Good to see
you, Lisa.
>> I'm here. I'm just working on stuff
while while I'm sitting here. So, yes,
I'm just here to listen and see what you
need me to do.
>> Yeah, we're going to track some stuff
tonight, I imagine. That's
>> what I thought.
>> Very good.
Okay. Um,
Marbeth Holler.
>> Um, hey there. Um, I'm just here to
support the school and I'm really hoping
that the the school budget isn't cut
very much. Um, I know they're already
working with the deficit. Um, there's an
increase in student enrollment. So, just
trying to make sure that, you know,
hold on. Nope. Go on up. Just want to
make sure that, you know, my kids get
what they need and hopefully everybody
else. So, thank you guys for all you do,
though.
>> Thank you.
Um, Matt, I believe our administrator is
here.
>> Just watching. Thank you.
>> Very good, sir.
Matthew Hagerty.
>> All set, but thank you.
>> Okay. Thanks,
Melissa Latesca.
>> Uh, yeah. I just wanted to say that um I
after hearing and reading all the
articles in the River East and
everybody's concern is that the taxes
overall are getting higher and residents
are having a hard time keeping up with
taxes and as fuel prices increase and
inflation has been going up. I think as
a town we just really need to look at
increasing our tax base and our revenue
so that the b the residents don't bear
the brunt of the burden of taxes. Um, I
just hope that that's a conversation
that starts being had more and more
frequently. How do we increase tax
revenue in the town?
>> Okay,
Michelle Lorent.
>> Um, I'm here in support of the school
and the town. Um, I feel like both the
budgets were reasonable. Um, I my
concern is with the budget cuts is how
much that's going to affect us in the
coming winter and hurricane season when
we cut town budgets. I mean, we've
already been struggling um I think with
keeping people on. Um, as well as only
having one plow person, it caused a lot
of chaos this winter. Um the other thing
is is that when we consider the school
budget, are we considering the effect
it's going to have on students that are
protected by IDEA and state laws? Um a
lot of people uh especially if you are
older than 43, uh you don't remember
inclusive inclusive learning. Um and so
there were institutions back then and
there aren't anymore. And so we have to
service all children equitably and
equally. And without proper funding,
those students don't get what they need.
They don't get the services they need.
They don't get um they don't get a real
learning environment. And so when we do
things like that, like are we really
taking into consideration the effect
it's going to have on future adults and
whether or not um honestly like whether
or not we're just doing it to reduce the
dollar because everything everything in
cost is going up and that's not just an
andover thing that's a national thing.
Uh, so I really hope that you're
considering not just the youth but the
seniors in town that require needs,
people that have needs that need more
support with getting in and out of their
houses, able to get their medications,
things like that. Um,
and I guess that's really all I have to
say. I mean,
so thank you.
>> Thank you. I believe next up is Marcy.
Hey, Rob. Did you get my message? I just
texted you. Someone's Someone's trying
to get in.
>> Oh, I'm sorry. I'm I'm probably so deep
in the participant list. I didn't see
it. There's two people.
>> I just texted you. Yeah, I just texted
you. Sorry about
>> I got it. Thank you.
>> Yep.
>> Apologies, everyone. It's a very long
list now.
>> I uh obviously everyone uh the town's
people have spoken. Uh hope you'll
listen to the words that they said with
their votes. I uh wanted to answer Miss
Latesca's
uh concern about the town. Um I'm on the
EDC committee and one of the things that
I discovered by being on the committee
is that we just don't have any money to
uh support the town increasing our tax
base. And you see a lot of towns have
budgets for marketing and campaigning to
get new businesses in town. and it's
something that we struggle with. So, one
of the things that, you know, we try to
do is encourage our community to be, you
know, a a welcoming place for everyone.
Uh, but it's it's uh it's been a
challenge without the money that uh we
need for, you know, marketing ourselves.
So, anyway, that's just an answer to
that. Thanks.
>> Yeah, that's true. Um, all right. I
think I'm going to back up for a second
because one of some people I'm admitting
are in the list now. Uh Mike Beckwith,
do you have a public comment for us?
>> No comment. Thank you.
>> Thank you. Uh Sam Long.
>> Hi. Here in support of the school. Just
listening.
>> Okay. Thank you, Sam. All right. I have
um a person here just listed as a Sam
song. I I don't know who that is, but uh
if you'd like to public speak, now is
your time.
>> All right, I I'll come back. Shannon.
>> Yes, sir. Um first of all, I don't think
we need to make drastic budget cuts. I
don't think that was necessarily the
message from yesterday. I believe that
there are some relatively easy fixes
that will make the town's budget more
palatable to our community. First, the
town is going to receive about $100,000
from the state that has to be used for
education. That's getting back to being
more equitable now um with an increase
in the ECS dollars that hadn't been
changed since 2013.
Second, there's $50,000 sitting in
account that AES would have asked be put
in our capital account. Um but um that's
certainly it's sitting there. It can be
turned to the town um and not put into
our capital account. Third, at a time
when we're all feeling financial
pressures, I think we do need to use
some money. Um I suggest at least
$100,000
from the town's very hearty fund
balance. Um, I just think um either to
do what Joanne said, which is to not
fund some of the funds for the town, um,
or to take money out of our fund
balance. I know you want to keep it at
about 15%.
But maybe with all of our needs this
year, um, that just won't be possible.
And I'll echo what uh, was said earlier.
I think we're RAM clearly is going to
have to cut its budget. So, we're going
to see some savings there.
If you do determine that you need to cut
budgets, which I have already said I
don't think you're going to need to, I
ask that you cut similar amounts from
the towns and the school's budgets to
reflect that the voters thought that
both budgets were similarly too high.
Last year, you cut the school by 160,000
and you added 50,000 to the town's
budget, which I don't believe was
equitable. Again, I don't think you need
to make drastic cuts. There's money
there um that can be used to offset our
towns and schools expenses that I think
would make uh the budget a lot more
palatable and hopefully passable. Thanks
for all the work you're going to do.
>> Thank you, Shannon. Um okay, Stacy
Coffman,
>> just listening. Thank you.
Thank you.
Uh,
Anna, no, sorry, Valerie.
>> Hello. So, I would echo what um most
everybody has has said already. Last
year was a very difficult year. As as
Shannon Lden said, that $160,000 one-way
cut was very difficult. Um, but I would
also remind um all of of you guys and
the and the taxpayers that from 2015 to
2020, we were cut $418,000.
And so in the last 10 years, our
increase up to date is only $244,000 for
a decade. And so that's where we are
very different from some of our
neighboring towns. The way we got in
this situation this year where
unfortunately that number is a lot
higher than people would hope it was is
not because of poor spending. It's not
because of a lot of additions this year.
It's simply because we kicked the can
for years and years. And I know that's
not what anybody wants to do on the town
side or the school side. So, as been
mentioned already, there are quite a few
other revenue sources to consider
instead of cuts. Um, as was also
mentioned in a school budget, there's a
lot of mandates, unfunded mandates, but
mandates that can't be cut. So, um, I'm
just hoping that, you know, there's a
collaborative effort to drop the bottom
line, but to also remember the cuts that
have happened to the school, not only
last year, but in years prior. Thank
you.
>> Okay. Thanks, Belle. Um, sorry. Um,
where was I? I don't know if you want to
try Samsung again if they're still
>> Yeah. Um, yes. Whoever the Samsung phone
is.
>> Yeah. Sorry about that. Um, can you hear
me?
>> Yes, I can hear you.
>> My name's My name's Dave Tibido. Sorry,
I didn't realize that it was listing my
phone. But I mean, I, you know, I
appreciate the, you know, it it's like
walking a tight rope for you guys and I
appreciate the how hard it is to to come
up with a budget, but um, you know,
there's there's also a quality of life
that needs to be maintained and, you
know, uh, by raising taxes, everybody's
quality of life goes down or a lot of
people's quality of life. So, it's not
an endless source of revenue to raise
people's taxes. And um I know you know
that, but uh just wanted to add that.
And I I would also say I haven't seen a
decrease in my taxes in the last uh five
or six years. So, I don't understand
that comment, but
>> Oh, I I mean, I can just just briefly. I
mean, last year when we finally passed a
budget, um it there was actually it was
actually a very small decrease to
taxation. It was half a percentage
point. I'm not saying it was
>> well I didn't see it in my tax bill. So
I I don't know maybe there was a mistake
but anyways um it is what it is right.
So I would just that's all I want to say
and you know everybody you know the
school not everybody uses the school.
Okay my kids are grown but you know of
course when they went to school I
obviously supported the school. I still
support school. Um but uh you know I
look at some of the
the charge the expenses that the school
has and some of them are a little bit
outrageous but um you know I I think the
towns have spoken and I know Andover
didn't speak as loud as Heurn but um a
little disappointed to see the small
turnout in Andover but um anyway good
luck to you guys and uh hope we can come
up with something reasonable.
Thank you.
>> All right. Thank you. Uh apologies
because the list is so long. Stacy, did
I get you already?
>> Yes.
>> Okay. Thank you. Um Toriiana, I believe
you are from the River East. Um I
believe just to to watch our meeting,
but if you want to say something, now's
your time.
>> Uh I am from the River East, but I am
all good. Thank you.
>> Okay. Thank you. Uh Leanne Hutchinson.
>> Yes. Hi. Um
I don't have any specific suggestions at
this time. I was just wondering um often
things are done um by the board of
finance by percent and this may come up
by itself but if you make decreases
tonight I was just wondering if you
could translate that into what that or
or very close to what that would make
the mill rate be. Thank you.
Yeah, we we can um we have the mill rate
spreadsheet and depending exactly on
where we end up um the calculation we
may end up collapsing the mill rate back
into one
>> a simpler calculation
>> percent or thank you. Yeah, whether you
do it by percent or um or by straight
dollar.
We can we can uh we can pull up that
mill rate calculation spreadsheet. You
know, if we once we have a a number, we
can we can talk about what that would
mean.
>> Thank you.
>> Okay. Now, um since I was admitting
people during this, if I have missed
anyone, speak up now. I don't think I
think there might be one person. I I
don't I don't know if I missed anyone.
If if anyone hasn't had a chance for
public speak, please speak now.
I see Mike Beck with on. I didn't see
him in the comments.
>> We got Mike.
>> Oh, we did. Oh,
>> yeah. He got He got his chance.
>> There's a phone number.
>> Uh just an 860. Um
>> Jesse Ban. Did he have a chance?
>> Oh, Jesse. That's right. We I don't I
think I just admitted him recently.
>> Did Geette get a chance as well or
>> Geette? No, I don't think so. Geette,
right. So, all right. Um, let's start
with Jesse and we'll go to Geette next.
>> Uh, good evening. No, I'm just curious
to see what happens today with the board
after
last night's mandate. Just curious to
see what's going to happen. Thank you.
Thank you, Geette.
Okay. Um, and again, there is a phone
number. It's just 742-5475.
Did Did we get you?
>> Yes. This is Leanne. Again, my phone
number um almost always shows up in
addition to my name. I don't know why
that is, but thank you. No problem.
>> That is me.
>> All right. Understood. Technical issues.
They are. But they are.
>> We have Elizabeth Partridge, too. I
don't think she was.
>> We got Elizabeth, I believe.
>> Oh, she Oh, she did speak. Okay.
>> Did we get
>> Did we get Anna?
>> Oh, we didn't get Anna.
>> Oh, did was Anna one of the late admits?
Okay, Anna, you're up.
>> Good evening. I'm just I'm watching from
the laptop and listening and speaking
from my phone because I'm having some
audio issues. I just um listening in
just for see what happens this evening
and just following up on my request
after the last um public meeting. I sent
an email um and I would still like to
request um the line items um for total
salaries both for the um town of Andover
employees and for the um uh Andover
public school employees as well.
So just following up on those requests.
>> Okay.
Um Jeff is
>> Jeff McGuire. I don't think you hit
Jeff. Oh, is Jeff on? I didn't see him
on the list. That's weird.
>> Why is I come up as Tone of Andover.
>> Oh, okay. For some reason, I was
thinking that was Matt, but you're
right. Matt's on his own name. All
right. Go ahead, Jeff.
>> That's good. I don't I don't have
anything to add to public speak. I'll
talk during the meeting.
>> Fair enough.
>> All right.
So, that gets us to discussion. Uh
before we get into the discussion, I
just want to mention um my understanding
of the state number the the the
supplemental aid that we're receiving is
$97,943.
And you know, I'm thinking about Lisa
where we want to put that, you know,
whether it's revenue, whether it's, you
know, intergovernmental,
uh whether it's a supplemental line that
we just stick underneath the ECS number.
But that number needs to come in, you
know, right off the top there. You know,
it's about a 1% uh benefit to us in
terms of in terms of lowering the tax
increase. Uh so there's that. Uh we
talked briefly about the likelihood of
Ram's number coming down. They have a
meeting, I believe, Tuesday.
Um, so unfortunately that overlaps with
our next town meeting,
town budget meeting, but that is when
they'll be making I think their
decisions.
It's hard it's hard to know what they're
going to do and we can't plan exactly on
it, but I I think we can plan on some
benefit from that. Um, okay. So,
the results, why don't we I got that
email from Diane. Why don't I go ahead
and share this?
All right. Can you guys see this?
>> Mhm.
>> All right. So, I mean, I think we all
know this number here. The the I think
we wanted to look at here with the
advisory questions. As you can see, um,
majorities,
um, with a slightly larger majority on
on the school side, uh, but majorities
said both budgets were too high. Um, you
know, 456 for the school, for 392, uh,
for the town. So, those inform, you
know, kind of my perspective on what we
need to do. um in addition to obviously
kind of the the help we're getting the
oneshot help we're getting from the
state and whatever benefit we might get
from RAM. Now board members will recall
uh going into the town meeting when we
presented our budget we had made a
decision to take the budget to the town
and get the feedback before we did
anything visav fund balance. You know,
last year part of the way we got that
little tax decrease in, you know, in our
budget was to use $190,000 in fund
balance. This year, right now, as the
budget stands, we're using none. Uh we
have 2.1 million in unassigned fund
balance, so we could consider that uh in
addition to cuts.
So, you know, my thinking is to do a
mixture u a mixture of using, you know,
the benefit from the state money a
mixture of a little bit of fund balance
and a mixture of cut small cuts I think
modest cuts to school and town and try
to get us down to more like you know if
we could get down to three and a half or
something like that we're at 6.7 now for
for review for recap purposes uh for a
tax increase obviously as people have
mentioned much higher tax increase than
we've seen uh for quite some time in
this town so if we could get that down
to a much more moderate number I think
we we stand a decent chance of passage.
So, that's my two cents, but I'm going
to open it up to the rest of the board
to talk about it and and you know, hear
your thoughts about what you want to do.
>> Oops. Sorry guys, I should leave that
up.
>> Rob, did you say the RAM meeting is next
Tuesday?
>> That is my understanding. Uh, originally
I think they were going to do it Monday
night, but I heard from Robera today
that that they had moved it to Tuesday.
>> Okay. And when is when do we when does
this when do we have to have ours done
again by?
>> We have we have to take it to the town
Tuesday.
>> Tuesday.
>> It's unfortunately it's an overlay. The
the thing about the charter is that when
we have a rejected budget, we have to go
back to town meeting in a week.
>> Right.
So if we went back whatever we did
>> and our budget passes
>> and then RAM comes back with a different
number
>> if they come in say say we don't
incorporate any any propos you know any
thoughts of a of a cut there because we
can't because they haven't made a
decision yet. We would if our budget
passes then I think after our budget
passes we still meet to set the mill
rate and when we would do that we would
simply set a lower mill rate.
>> Okay.
>> I think we still can take it into
account even if it's after
>> yeah I mean because it's it's it's just
a lowered outlay. So uh we would just
lower the mill rate accordingly. I I
believe
>> thank you. Mhm.
>> So, since the um budget did not pass,
now we're dealing with two separate
budgets. Correct.
>> Do we want to concentrate on one on the
town first and go to AES or
who's got comments on that?
>> Obviously, we should probably look at
them individually, one at a time.
>> That's what I said,
>> right?
>> I think that makes sense.
>> Let's go look.
>> I agree.
>> Yeah. I I wouldn't I'm curious to look
at um to kind of compare the operations
side from the um the capital side.
Uh it's been a while since
>> I got to pull up our spreadsheet here.
Hang on a second, Liz. It's a good
point. Let me um
>> I want to I'm trying to find the most
recent one. There's an awful lot of
these. We've been making a lot of
changes and and deliberations. So, give
me a moment. Uh I should have had that
up already. Let me look.
>> I think it's also it's hard to say that
the town has spoken one way or the other
when only like less than 800 people
voted.
>> That's sad.
>> I forget how many uh total voters we
have, but I I think we have like,00.
>> Um I think we had three quarters turn,
you know, three quarter turnout. I I I
could be wrong, guys, but that's my
recollection.
>> Yeah, it's pretty okay.
>> It's actually pretty good for a uh
budget for
>> a budget for a budget referendum. I
would describe it as high turnout,
actually. Very good turnout.
>> Yes. And everyone has the right to go
ahead and vote. I mean, if people decide
not to do it, it's on them.
>> Yep.
>> All right. Let me just see
the most recent spreadsheet that I have.
That's the pure.
And Rob, if you could let me know your
total so I'm I'm make sure that we met.
>> Yeah, I want to, you know, Lisa, I'm
looking I was looking for the last one
from you. I mean, I have one board
budget prelim 32426 and I feel like is
that really the last one?
>> 48 should be one for 47 or 48.
>> That's where I'm trying to find it. Um,
that's why I want to make sure I've got
the right one. Apologies. If you have it
ready to hand, can you email it? I was
just going to say, yeah, Lisa, does the
one that you have have the notes on the
side that we talked about in the column.
>> When you say notes, I'm just looking at
my laptop. When you say notes,
>> it's whatever is in notes that are in
the book. Is that what you're talking
about?
>> Like whenever we were discussing certain
line items,
>> right hand column, we would add notes.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Okay.
>> Um, it it is on the website, too. But do
you guys I mean, this isn't I have I
have a chart that's dated 51.
That's seems to be
>> I don't think I have that because
>> town meeting was only what 4-1 and then
the vote was five.
So I don't
>> I don't know why it says 41. It must
have it must be a five might be a typo
but it's town it say it's entitled town
budget meeting. But why don't you send
around the last one you have because I
want to work off yours and we can,
you know, not have any screw-ups here.
Um,
>> all right.
>> Send me what you've got so we can look
at it again. We can and we can look at
ops, we can look at capital.
um
>> going to take
>> as I recall we were at we were at about
a 6% increase
on the town side op for the ops budget
and negative two 2.9
um for capital
that's where I remember us being
>> hold on
and then I'll share it and we'll go
through it.
Now I want to make sure I'm grabbing the
right one. So
uh
sorry we should have sorted this out
earlier.
>> Um hold on because that doesn't say
it's got RAM on it because I know we had
to make that last minute RAM change.
So
hold on.
>> Right. I have a Miller rate one 43, but
that's just the mill rate chart. We need
the We need the detail, the budget
detail.
>> Let me just open it up before I send it.
Make sure.
>> Okay. Thank you.
>> All right. This looks like prelim as of
4826.
So, it's coming at you, but just um
>> Oh, it's saying missing subject. Hold
on. It's going to put
>> All right. Well, you know, while we wait
for that, um
>> All right. I sent it. See if you all get
it.
>> Okay.
>> Jeff and Scott, should I send it off?
>> Thank you.
>> To the board of selectmen, too, or just
let it go? No. Okay,
>> I got it. Let it go for now. We could
send it out. We could send out whatever
we
>> Okay.
>> Let's Let's do our thing and then we can
circulate what we've produced.
>> Okay.
>> Thank you.
>> Yeah.
>> You go ahead and share that.
>> Yeah, I'm I'm working on that right now.
>> Okay.
So, I just want to double check
something while we're here. I got to
move some things so I can actually see
this. What do you think? I was going to
say if we just take a look at that vote
and just that is the dollar amount on
that vote. It's not. Is it the one you
showed? It's probably not.
>> Sorry. What?
>> I just wanted to verify that total is
the total that was on that vote total.
But I don't think the dollar amounts are
on there. Are they
>> that you showed?
>> No. Yeah.
>> No, but I I mean we have the budget
presentation we could look at, but I I
this looks right to me. 6.08. That's
correct. Yeah.
>> 2.92. That's correct.
>> Mhm.
>> This is right.
>> Okay. And we made the entry down at the
very bottom about RAM. So,
>> yeah.
>> Yep.
>> Yeah. The RAM line 503.
>> Yeah. Yep.
>> Cuz we had this here. This is the 20
258,
>> right? So, you know, now, oops, sorry. I
was trying to scroll up. Uh, one of the
things, Lisa, I don't know how we want
to display it.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. But, um, where do we have? So,
here's ECS, right?
>> So, now would we
add
something here to the effect of
supplemental state aid fiscal year 27
and put in that number that we're going
to, you know, the 97,000, etc. number
here.
Oh, sorry. That's the wrong year.
>> Yeah. Way over there. Yeah.
>> Yeah. There we go. 97
943.
>> And then fix your cell. Yeah.
>> Just one second. Just so we understand
that that number is broken down into two
pieces.
>> Yes, that's correct.
>> Right.
>> So, we might want to display it that way
if you want. Uh, supplemental education
aid is 80,192.
So, I'll tell you what. We'll just let's
just do it that way. And we'll tally it.
Um,
we'll say supplemental ECS. Is that
fair? 819
two. And then down here it would be
supplemental
uh town aid FY27
and that is 17751.
And so everybody's aware that 80,192
has to be an increase in the budget
total to even get that money. Just
letting everybody know that.
>> And sorry, sorry. Hold on. Hold on a
second. What What were you say there,
Jeff? Because
>> we have to raise the budget by a minimum
of 80,192
to get that money,
>> which we've already done.
Well, you will you've already
>> I was looking at the guidance the email
we got from CCM talking about guidance
indicated that but it also was saying
that you know towns that had already
passed their budgets had that issue but
it was it wasn't clear to me that
because we haven't passed a budget yet
and we have an increase in there that
that's the case for us.
>> What I'm saying I'm not I'm not telling
you you won't increase it by that amount
of money. I'm telling you if you don't
increase it by the educational spending
by 80,192
the town would not get the money.
>> Right?
>> That's all I'm saying. I'm not saying
it's good. I'm just telling you at a
minimum
>> it needs to go up by that much 80,192 to
get the money.
>> Right. Understood. That's correct. Thank
you.
So just to just to have that now let's
see if that propagated properly. Let's
go down to the bottom.
and see if that hopefully all the
formulas worked.
And we should see a lower number now.
No. See, now it didn't.
>> Well, expenditures. No, expenditures is
that's right. Expenditures shouldn't
have changed. That's fine.
>> Do you need to negate it? Make it
>> brand total revenue. There we go. Now,
this hopefully includes it. Let's take a
look here.
>> Now, see, it's not picking it up.
>> All right. I would go back up to the
top. That's what I'm trying to do. And
just make sure that your total for your
revenues are correct
>> because that's that cell may not be
included,
>> right? You added
>> It's not drawing from this cell for some
reason. And it's drawing from
>> from that cell though cuz that was the
total. That's what I'm saying. Yeah.
>> Right.
>> We need I27.
>> What?
>> Here
because this is picking up this that's
correct. This is the this is now the the
intergovernmental revenue number. It's
2.2 million now. So I27
>> here.
>> Are these dogs been eating poop?
>> No.
>> Would we add
Well,
>> don't we need to take it and make it
negative if we're getting that money?
>> No. That would be
>> We're adding to revenue. We're adding to
revenue. Yeah.
>> Adding it to revenue. All right.
Actually, I think it's five.
there and then we add this
I 26.
>> You want to do your totals though. I'm
what I'm doing is I'm trying to add cuz
cuz you know we split the two numbers.
One goes under other town revenue and
one goes under
you know education revenue, right?
So,
you see what I did?
>> I24
is Let's come back up here. Right.
>> I24 is the regular ECS number. I25 is
the supplemental ECS, the 80,000. And
then I26 is the supplemental town aid.
Right.
>> All right. Hold on. Where did Now I've
got the education part. Where did you
put the town part?
>> Right below it. I put it
>> enter
>> in other town revenue here. I added I26.
Excuse me.
>> Oh, no. I
>> Does that make sense?
>> Well,
>> yeah, but but top somewhere where you
put in the
>> Oh, wait. I 27's already being in there,
isn't it? Interesting. Why is I27?
>> Because
>> that's what the original the original
formula.
Oh,
so actually that comes out
>> because you actually I'm thinking you
put them both up or are up into
intergovernmental revenues. You put 80,
you know, for the school in the first
line and then do the town line, but you
keep them all up there. I wouldn't add
them to the bottom. Instead, I would
correct the cell at the bottom if it's
got a wrong digit. If it's got a wrong
cell because that way it's
>> we want to we want to ultimately pick up
this number 2.2 million. Right.
>> Right.
And I have
but let's just wait and go down now.
Look at total revenue and make sure
>> Should we add it just here?
>> Should we add it there
>> to grant total revenue?
>> Can I make a recommendation? Can I make
a recommendation? Can I please like
>> Okay.
>> Uh Rob, close the spreadsheet. Reopen
the spreadsheet. Just let's just do
this. Nope. We're not going to add any
lines. We're not going to try to change
any formulas. Add the money into Town A
Road and add the money into ECS. We know
the the numbers are 80,17.
You know, you're going to increase and
send a budget to referendum that's more
than that. So, let's not worry about it.
We're we're wasting time trying to fix a
spreadsheet and we have a hundred people
on this call. So, that's what I would
ask you to do is like because you added
those two rows, you're creating a
formula problem, right? my
>> a cell problem.
>> So, close this.
>> All right, without saving it. So,
>> I can just I can just delete these out.
>> No, just I don't know what else. You
also made changes down the bottom. So,
I'm asking you just to close this out
and reopen the same thing that Lisa sent
you. Don't. Right.
>> And don't save it.
>> All right, Jeff.
>> All right. Thank you.
>> What that does, it just brings
everything back to what it was. Rob,
that's all.
>> I understand. I I had already done that,
but that's okay. That's fine.
>> No big deal.
Now, so what you're suggesting
>> is we add to this cell the 80,000
>> and we add
>> Yep.
>> So, let's go. Let's go do it. Does Let's
get right on that cell. 2 million. Go
over there. You got to put an equal sign
in front of it. It's 80,192.
>> Okay.
>> Yeah. and then go up the town a road.
>> It's It's not even here.
>> That That's what I say. It's not there.
That's not
>> It's not even there. So, it's not even
here. That this is a problem with the
whole process that we go through. We We
have never included grants which needs
to change next year.
>> Well, I agree.
>> All the grants.
>> So, you could put it under miscellaneous
for now. State miscellaneous.
>> Well, let me ask you the qu Well, you
see, you don't Yes, you're going to have
to put it under miscellaneous um later.
Let's not even worry about it. It's
$17,000. We'll figure that out after you
guys deal with all the expenses because
that's what we should be focused on is
not how we're paying for it, but what
we're spending.
>> Okay.
Fine. Um I just wanted to see the
impact. That was all. All right. Um
>> if if you want to put that in, put it
under town aid road. Uh not under town
road. Pick one. Pick anything you want
to put state miscellaneous
>> m
>> right
>> sure
>> miscellaneous gr grants and aid
>> yeah state put a note on the right
>> it's actually it's start of it's it's
all inter related to the pquad fund and
all that other municipal grants and aid
but there you go
>> okay
>> but you put it in the v oh okay never
mind all right I just want to make sure
>> the variance the variance picked it Yep,
I'm good.
>> Okay, I'm just going to save it.
Um,
okay. All right,
sorted that out.
So,
do we want to go through the
entire town budget? Do we want to just
focus on certain areas where we know we
have?
>> I think we should focus on certain areas
and I think we need to kind of go around
the board and see what areas people are
thinking about.
We can't go through the entire budget.
>> Yeah, we don't we we we'd be here
forever. I I agree.
>> Go down to the bottom.
>> You want to go down the bottom?
>> Yeah. I just want to see where the
largest increase was like capital versus
operations. I just wanted to see that
number.
>> Oh, capital was a decrease. We were at
um we're we're -2.92
on capital. We're down 30,000 from last
year.
>> Doesn't mean we couldn't adjust, but
we're already negative there
>> and we're we're um 6.12 6.12 for expend
total expenditures town,
>> right? We went up on the the town
because of some employee things. Um
>> a lot of employee stuff primarily. Yeah.
I would say mostly the employee stuff um
insurance costs that sort of stuff is
where the meat of that is.
So you know we
you know
>> what what was that admin assistant that
was l
>> we combined I believe we combined these
two lines
and added a little bit to it
um for an assistant for the town.
>> I mean the project manager is a separate
position I believe.
>> Right. Right.
>> We always come back. We always
>> You're right. You're right. I'm sorry. I
apologize. We combined it different. I
believe we added to this. I mean,
obviously the budget request here is up,
you know, $25,000
um from last year. I mean, we could we
could look at this line. We could I
mean, I I forget now the 25,000
increase I think was designed for a
certain number of hours a week if memory
serves.
>> Yeah. Does Does it look like an
additional person? I guess we we would
ask Jeff, does it look like an
additional person is going to be hired?
>> Right.
>> There are um
discussions of increasing the current
person's time and there's also
discussions about hiring a new person.
So, they're both on the table.
>> So, are they are they going to be done
July 1? It's a different question. I I
was just speaking with um
uh Matt today, our new town
administrator, and I told him he needs
to sit there and do an evaluation of his
needs. So, he's also working on that.
>> So, you're saying one or the other would
happen.
>> Correct.
>> Okay.
Well, thank you.
>> I mean, I guess the question is, you
know, do we think we need 30,000 there?
Do we
>> I don't know if if Matt can speak to
that yet. If he feels if he has any
ideas on the number of hours and whether
he needs that assistant, how many hours
he would need, if you thought about that
at all yet, Matt, or share any thoughts?
>> So, uh I because I'm so new here, it's
only been this is my fourth week here,
so I'm still uh you know getting the lay
of the land, so to speak. So, it's very
difficult for me to you know, say what's
going to happen. And I know this is when
I came in here, I was really not worried
about the budget as far as uh what's
going to happen until July 1st. So, uh I
mean the current person I have is a that
institutional knowledge that they have
is great. uh the town staff that we have
is has been very easy to work with, but
uh it there is a lot to do and uh so I
do need some assistance as far as it is
whether it be uh like as Jeff said,
whether it's going to be July 1st or
it's going to be delayed or something or
part of a year. Uh it's too early for me
to assess, you know, what what we can
do. I know that uh it would be great to
have somebody if if it was cut out of
the budget. It'd be very, you know, it'd
be very tough to, you know, continue the
operations as is, but we we will do what
uh we we'll do what the taxpayers say.
So, I'm it's too early for me to give
you a correct answer at this time.
>> But I'll answer questions if you have
any.
>> I think it was like 19 hours a week at
$25 an hour or something. Not a lot,
>> right? And that's and that's just shy of
25,000. So, the question is, do we need
30 in there?
I think that we
need to let Matt have the help. Um, I
think that when we had Eric, we this
position was really, really important
and he didn't have the assistance that
he needed. So,
I'm not for cutting this position back
at all.
>> Right. Could we at least look at
bringing it to the 25,000 which is the
19 times the $25 an hour?
>> Right. I mean bear in mind we we did we
took that's the thing and that's a good
point Bill because what we did was we
took the the the existing about $5,000
we're spending
>> to have Kate help, right? And we added
$25,000 to that.
>> Right. So, we could bring it back to
25,000 and
>> and still fund that person.
>> I think the the 5150 was a stipend or
something, right? So, we don't need that
anymore.
>> It's a well, it's a stipend. And I think
um
>> we're going to be using it unless and
until we hire somebody
to the position, right?
>> Because Kate would still be needed until
we, you know, unless we fill that
position, right?
>> Yeah. Mhm.
>> I I think I'd like to make a motion that
we that we take that 30,000 bring it
down to 25,000
>> which gives us that 19 hours at $25 an
hour.
>> Do we have a second on that?
So I guess the only thing about that is
um if Kate So if he hires somebody
separate separate
that stipen is for the current person
that is assisting is the plan for her to
continue to assist in a certain in a
different capacity you know in addition
to what she normally does. Who's her? I
think that was why I think that's why
the stipen was kept initially instead of
>> right. I guess that's I guess that's a
good question, Liz, because I'm really I
feel like I'm uncertain as to what the
plan is.
>> I think is I would ask Jeff McGuire. I
think that's that was why we left it in
there, right?
>> The plan the plan was to provide
additional assistance to the town
administrator. That was what the plan
is. If you cut it by 5,000, we're just
going to adjust the plan and the amount
of money we pay for someone. I am not
adverse to you guys moving this $25,000
on behalf of the town. And listen, just
so you understand, whatever you give us,
we're going to work with. That's what
we've done. You You have to realize when
you cut and you cut more than you really
should, you just cut services for the
community. And but that's okay. We'll
figure it out. You guys got a tough job.
Do what you need to do. I'm not adverse
to you guys sitting there making a
$5,000 cut to that line item.
>> Second that.
>> Okay. Liz seconds. No motions. Liz
seconds
>> to reduce 102-101
admin assistant from 30,000 to 25,000.
Do we have any further discussion on
this? I think we've kind of talked it
through.
>> That doesn't change the benefits for
that person, does it?
>> There's no benefits at 19
18 19 hours. I think that's the point.
>> I know above though what it was for
30,000. How many hours was that?
>> Well, again, I don't think it was
intended to
I think it was we took the stipend
amount that's currently being used
>> 25,000.
>> Right.
>> So, it's it's not it's not a benefits
position.
>> There's no benefits. Okay.
>> Yeah, that's my understanding. Louise.
Louise, there should be a note. There
should be a note here on the side that
says the 5,150
stipent was kept on here. So, it's not
like the salary would be 30,000. Um
>> Oh, okay. It's
>> Yeah, it's just under 25. If you do the
math, if you do, you know, 19 hours a
week at $25 an hour, 52 weeks a year,
you get like 24,000 and change.
Okay. That's adding the five. Okay.
>> So, why don't we Yeah, let's let's just
keep this going. Why don't we go around
take a vote? Um uh I'm just going to go
in order of what you guys are on my
screen. Bill,
>> yes.
>> Liz,
>> Heather,
>> yes.
>> Louise,
>> Tim,
>> yes.
>> Nick,
>> And I'm a yes. I believe that's all of
us. 70. So, reduced
two.
Okay. Ah.
Okay.
Very good. Um, what about the project
manager?
>> So, this is a position we've never had
before. Is that That's correct. Right.
We've been talking about it for years,
but we've never filled it.
>> Where are we on that? What's you know,
what's the thinking there? The thing was
there were so many there were so many
grants that we had received
>> that Eric to administer them all he just
couldn't do it. So yeah project manager
he was like above capacity for for for
that stuff. What I meant was what what
was the thinking in terms of um salary
hours that sort of thing.
>> We we uh wait a second we are utilizing
that position this
>> we're using it right now.
>> Okay.
>> Correct. Yes. So, um, uh, Christine
Rendazo is managing the field project
that is going on currently,
>> and she hasn't submitted any bills, but
she'll be submitting bills, and and I
believe we'll will come under that
$15,000. But
>> with the um, Lake Road project coming
up, the Bazula Road culvert coming up,
and some other projects that are coming
up, um, that amount of money is very
reasonable. So what we had done as a
board was sit there and say for
engineering services we were thinking
that we would have a $100 an hour rate
bill and that for engineering services
is pretty low. If you want to ask Jeff
Murray who's an engineer he can sit
there and go through that with you but
um that was what we were doing. So we
were thinking it would take 150 hours
Bill to sit there and go through it.
Right.
>> So
>> okay just asking
>> I think that's fair and thanks for the
correction on that. You're right. I
remember now that we are already
utilizing that position. Okay. I mean I
I personally wouldn't want to tweak that
then
I would think I think we should probably
move on. Anybody disagree?
>> Move on.
>> Yeah. Move on. Let's go down here. I
mean I I I personally don't want to
change this um given what Lisa's been up
to.
Um
>> against etc.
Um where where where are we on the um
treasurer clerk?
>> Have we hired anybody?
>> I know
>> treasurer clerk
>> that's a it's an operational issue and
yes we've interviewed people candidates
and uh uh Lisa is in the process of
sitting there and deciding um
who we're going to put in that position.
So that should be hopefully that
position is done as soon as possible so
Lisa can focus on more uh other things.
>> Yeah.
>> Right now we have an increase in there.
It's not a huge one. It's not going to
break the bank, but um you know this we
just want to confirm this is the number
we think we need to fill that position
properly.
>> How many?
>> It is a 13% increase. Are we having
>> Is this full-time? How many hours a week
is this?
>> This is full-time.
>> And um
I would lower
>> obviously I mean we want
>> I would lower I would lower that.
Listen, I would lower that one $5,000
because and and and Lisa, you tell me if
I'm wrong. There is the tra there was a
stipen in that number.
>> I think that's right. Yeah, because it
was separate before, but um yeah, I
think it is in there now.
>> I would remove the stipen of $5,000.
That was not well spent money,
>> right?
>> All right, I'm fine.
>> Didn't we Wait, didn't we remove it
above in the line above?
>> That's what I thought.
>> Yeah, it's here. It's here. We already
did that.
>> Well, then how did that number get up so
high?
>> I don't this number here. I didn't do I
I think this came to us this way.
I'd have to go back.
>> I would reduce I would reduce it by the
5,000 then
>> another I would make the motion that we
reduce the 58.
>> It's still higher than last year. So
Okay.
>> Yeah.
>> To 534.
>> Okay. So, bill moves we reduce 109-120
treasur clerk wages from 58400 to 53400.
Do we have a second? I'll second that.
>> Okay. Thank you, Kim. Kim seconds.
>> I just did a calculation and I think
it's okay. I think it'll work.
>> Okay. Thank you, Lisa. I appreciate the
input.
>> Yep.
>> All right. Um, again, I'm I'm just going
to go in my list in order. Bill,
>> yes.
>> Liz,
>> Cam,
>> yes.
>> Nick,
>> Heather,
>> yes.
Louise.
>> Yes.
>> And I am also a yes. So we're going to
reduced by 5K.
>> Okay. You got that, Lisa? For notes
purposes. Okay, great.
>> All right. I don't think there's much
else here
>> to work with. Um,
right. This is this is contractual stuff
I believe. I don't want to
this is a contract. I mean, you know,
>> um that that's a good point. Can I ask
one quick question of Lisa? Lisa, uh did
you look at the uh the union increase on
the assistant clerk, assistant
treasurer?
>> No, but I have it with me. Hold on.
>> Because that's something that we have to
make. I know the increase isn't 5 grand,
but the increase is probably in the 3%
range.
>> We need to make sure that we have that
covered.
>> Contract out.
>> Sorry about that.
>> All right.
>> Okay. Appreciate it. Don't want to get
it wrong.
>> Let me find the rates.
We could probably adjust the hours
slightly if we needed to to make it
work.
>> Um, all right. Hold on. Let's see.
Assistant to treasurer.
No, that's okay.
>> Okay.
>> Yeah. No, it I I Well,
I I hope it's okay. We haven't done any
final negotiation, so I think it's
reasonable what the rate is.
>> We'll make it work. We'll make it work.
>> All right, let's try to keep moving. Um,
>> nothing really there.
>> Nothing. There's not much here.
>> Nothing there.
>> I mean, it's often the case in the town
ops budget that there's there's not a
ton. Um, we talked about this
extensively. We got more to do on
elections.
Um,
you know, we got a bunch of 3% in here.
I I can't find myself getting too worked
up about that.
>> Nope.
>> Um,
payroll services. Remind me, Lisa, we
were talking about
>> ADP,
>> right?
>> Yeah.
>> Is this going to cover that? Um what did
we say that it was going to cost? Um a
thousand increase because we're not
going to use the time clocks and they
would do the first mix six months for
free.
>> I'm still trying to make arrangements
with them. I haven't been able to
connect with them.
>> Right. Okay. Um
>> that's what it that's what the cost was
going to be. It was what 20 20 about
2400 to use the clocks and we wouldn't
use the clocks. Um and then the first
six months were free so it ended up
costing a thousand more than what we
were at. So it was an increase of a
thousand but it wasn't
>> a huge increase.
>> I mean at least in this line we're not
up a thousand. We're up 184 bucks. So
>> Right.
>> Okay.
>> Mhm. Um
>> but I will say I am finding more and
more problems with the payroll service.
So
I really don't
>> is going to be a good thing.
>> Yeah.
>> So does the 2184 I guess
>> yeah the question is this functional is
this number functional
>> if if we Yeah. Because if we come in in
July and we start using it and we get
six months free
>> just leave it for this this cycle and
>> just leave it for the cycle. It's only
if it's going to go up, it's going to go
up less than $1,000 and we'll be able to
figure that out.
>> We We'll figure it off if we have to
take it for contingency, whatever.
Right.
>> All right.
>> Good deal.
>> Fair enough.
>> Right. I think that's fair.
>> Okay.
>> I mean, this is just insurance, you
know. It is what it is. Um,
>> can you go back up just a little bit?
>> Can you go backwards?
>> Can you go back up a little bit?
>> Yeah.
>> Right there.
>> How far back?
>> Right. Well, for me that was
>> Keep going.
>> Keep going. Oh, backwards.
Okay. Just I I just need to make
everybody aware when you get to
janitorial services for the town, we
need to look at that line item.
>> Again, we're looking for an increase for
I forget the person's name that does
that, right?
>> No, no, no, no. There's a there's a
change bill. He he announced that he's
moving to North Carolina. So, the
charges that we were looking at doing,
we might I mean, listen, we're gonna
have problems honestly with that
position trying to fill it. Matt and I
were talking about it, but we want to
look at the line item to understand what
we didn't go to.
>> Supplies. We don't have
>> I wonder where it's under, but we'll
find it.
>> Should have been under facility
maintenance, but it's
>> Yeah, it may be under there. We we'll
find it.
>> It's Yeah, in a strange category, I
think down the bottom. I'm almost
positive. This is the person that did a
fabulous job and didn't
>> Yeah, that's amazing job.
>> Oh, that's a bummer.
>> That is a bummer. And he did it for for
cheap.
>> It's going to be hard to replace that.
Yeah.
>> Yep.
>> Okay.
>> I know. We want to talk about the
community center or we I mean we talked
about it a fair bit already but that's
where we're at on the chart.
>> There was an increase I think for more
um programming.
>> Yeah. And I think that the programming
is maybe under senior stuff uh and maybe
in a different part.
>> This is for the assistant
you know as you can see this is where
the meat of the increase is. I think
that's for more than one person though,
isn't it? Does that also
>> includes dispatcher is my notes?
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. It's so it's two things in one.
>> Correct.
>> Yeah. So it looks like a large increase
but it's more than
>> it it's two rolled together, right?
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> I can find my notes.
>> Custodian is 4199B
if you want to go back to that after
this.
>> Okay. Sorry, what is
>> custodian?
>> What was for? Sorry, what line?
>> Custodian.
>> Yeah, just keep doing what you're doing.
I just I I found custodian.
>> Oh, I see. It's still to come, right?
That's what I thought. Okay.
>> Okay. Town garage. Not much to talk
about. That's down. Old town halls,
nothing. Old firehouse, nothing. It's
down.
>> All right. So, that's facilities. Um,
okay. This is just 3% stuff. Contracts
plow blade.
I mean, what are you going to do?
Custodian.
>> Yes, that's the one. Yep.
>> All right.
So, we had really bumped it up to pay
the person
and I'm sorry I don't know his name
>> more in line with what he deserves, but
um is that enough money I guess to hire
someone to replace him? I don't know if
Jeff if you have thoughts on that.
>> Yeah, I'm just laughing because that's
every town building. That's the library
that we cut pay out of there. That's
everything. So, it's almost a joke that
that amount.
>> Well, he you know,
>> how many hours a week do we talk about
here?
>> 19.
>> Yeah, he was they he and his wife came
in and tag team it and they came one
day, but they did such a good job that
we're gonna we're gonna see it.
>> We're gonna see it.
>> Yeah.
>> I I would
go ahead, Jeff. I I I was sitting there
thinking we might be able to reduce it,
but we can't reduce that. I just sit
there and go, I don't know how Matt and
how we'll get it filled.
>> So, I mean that that's 19 hours at 25 an
hour. That's what that is. It's it you
know 14 24 you know 875 or something
like that. So that 25,000 or
>> that that's all that gets you.
>> That's it. So
>> we can't reduce it.
>> No,
>> I don't I don't think I would want to
reduce it either. I agree.
And I mean we're talking I mean in terms
of the increase we're talking about
$2,000 here.
>> What did you say that was the 19 hours
at at how much?
>> Yeah, that's what I'm just thinking.
That 19 hours I'm thinking of payroll
and I pay him like
20 hours, but I believe that's for two
weeks.
>> So he might only be 10 hours a week.
>> I would have to check payroll, but that
I don't know why I'm thinking that.
>> Does that sound right, Jeff?
We're actually getting two people.
>> I thought we are. So, I thought we were
getting him one day in the town offices
and
>> um
>> it's just not we're not going to we're
not going to be able to fill it because
he also gets down to the to the to the
library and you know they they tag team
it. So, it's two people that are coming
in and working at the same time. And
>> Lisa, I don't know. Are you paying him
as an employee? We're not paying him as
an employee, are we?
>> Yeah, we are. Yeah.
>> Okay. Okay.
>> And what's the hourly rate
>> at 19 hours at how much? 20
>> I think at 25, didn't we?
>> Yeah, but that was like I said that was
for 19 a week. I I honestly don't think
it's 19 a week.
>> I think that's I'm just thinking off the
top of my head when I do payroll that
it's like 19 or 20 hours, but or 22.
It's close to that, but that's for two
weeks. I would have to take a look.
>> That's okay. You're not gonna be
>> I think it's any better. Yeah. If you
guys
>> And that's like like Jeff said, the
point is there's two of them.
>> Yeah.
>> That's just one person. There's two of
them.
>> Hire Yeah. We're going to hire a new
person. We're going to need to be able
to
>> pay them
>> fund that.
>> Great.
>> Okay. I would move on honestly.
>> Yes.
>> Okay. There's not there's really nothing
here. Talk about me again. 3%.
Uh the trooper I mean we don't find out
right until we're into the year
>> usually.
>> That's right. That's the amount. We were
given the amount. Yeah.
>> On time this year.
>> Okay. We already talked about that then.
It is what it is.
>> I'm not going to go on that crusade
again. Okay.
>> Moving on.
>> We talked about that.
This needs to happen. Um,
this was we this is required. We we
basically no choice here. Memory serves.
It's the animal control situation. We
just we have to pay what we're being
build. Um,
so yeah. So, senior citizen public
welfare. I think this is Bill when you
were talking about programming. That's
>> yeah, quite a quite a steep increase in
programming. And as much as I support
the community center and the
programming, in a year like this, we
might have to, I think, consider
>> something here.
>> Yeah, I disagree.
>> I mean, I hate to, but it's it's a big
increase for one year. In a year, we're
looking at uh
we got to do some trimming.
>> Those are all the new programs that TESS
is incorporating into this new year.
Everybody wanted Tess to increase the
programming and that's what she did.
>> I agree with Scott.
>> I will say I talked to Tess about it
because we were I think Bill you brought
up that there were art classes for youth
and for seniors.
>> And I I think what she relayed to me was
she wanted to get some of that youth in
there. So she may have some of use used
some of that for a youth class art
class. But the other two art classes
were for seniors. And I think those are
between 300 and 500 a piece. So it's not
a huge deal. But I I don't know if she's
on. I guess she's not on tonight. But
she was trying to do like like I don't
know Jeff said that people asked her to
do stuff. So she was trying to do that.
>> I think we should try and reduce it by
5,000.
I mean, I I get she's got stuff um that
she's got planned.
We don't have a lot of places to cut.
>> I would like to
>> we we listen, we can work with Tess to
try to increase her fees for that and I
do realize that that impacts seniors,
but it is more of a payforplay. It's
it's what we should be doing in the
entire town, asking groups to sit there
and increase the fees they're charging
for specific services. So, I don't have
a problem with you cutting this line
item. I don't want you to eliminate it,
but I do have no problem with the
$5,000.
>> Seems Yeah, I mean that it's a big jump.
I'm going to make a motion to cut this
line by five grand.
>> I'll second it.
>> All right. Liz moves to cut 145870
program senior citizen by $5,000. That
would take it down from 12805 to 7805.
>> No, you're in there.
>> No, no, no, no. It would take it down to
1185.
>> Yeah.
>> Yep.
>> 16.
>> Sorry. You're right. Let's do that
again. I was looking at the variance. My
fault. Uh, from 16805 down to 1185.
Thank you guys.
Wrong column. All right.
>> I have a question on that.
>> We didn't vote on that though.
>> Yeah, Louise, go ahead.
>> Yeah. Does that include um the software
that they're getting for the
programming?
>> No, the software the software is is the
software is taken care of. It's a
separate
>> Okay. Isn't it supposed to go down to
Wait, I don't see the change made.
>> I haven't made the change.
>> We're in discussion. We're in
discussion.
>> All right. Thanks. Sorry.
>> I'm not crazy. Well, maybe I increased.
>> Yeah, but that not because of that.
>> All right. Does anyone else have more
commentary before we do take a vote on
this one?
>> Yeah, I think uh Jeff made a good point
um to increase the fees for people just
walk in and take those classes.
>> That may that may make up for it.
>> All right.
Okay. Uh I'll go around. Bill,
>> yes.
>> Liz,
>> yes. Louise,
>> yes.
>> Heather,
>> Nick,
>> yes.
>> And Kim,
>> no.
>> Kim's a no. And I'm uh I'm a yes. So
that's uh 61.
And we're going to take this to 1185.
Uh reduced 5K
56 26. I should have
that. All right.
Okay,
Lisa, you got a running tally of the
cuts we're making, right?
>> Yep.
>> What are we at now? We're like We made a
couple of two two three small cuts.
We're at maybe 15,000.
>> 15,000, I think. Yeah.
>> Yeah. Okay. Okay. I mean, I don't That's
We're getting about to as far as I
really wanted to go, but we got to get
to capital, too. Um, I don't think
there's much in here. We can
>> I know we talked about it. Oh, sorry.
>> Go ahead, Nick.
>> I know we talked about it before, but
the lunches
was What was the reason for the lunch
fee?
>> Oh, the the increase in the lunches
they would I think she was adding adding
more of them.
>> She was research.
>> But are we charging as well, too? I'm
just wondering.
>> We charge but we char I think it's I
think they get charged. What is it?
>> Six bucks ahead. Something like that.
>> Five. Five dollars ahead.
>> It's five. Okay. I don't know why I
thought six.
>> It just somewhere here. I had notes from
Tess, but I I've lost.
>> And go out to dinner. How much
everything has increased?
>> Yeah. There's no
>> That's not a big That's not a big
increase.
>> No, it's not an increase. It was an
increase from last year, guys. Yeah.
>> But I'm looking at it compared to the
actuals
>> from the year before last. No, he's he's
looking at it compared to what is
reported in the the current line item
for through January. And that's I mean I
don't know.
>> This is this is the exact same budgeted
amount for last year.
>> No, no, no, no, no. He's right. Nick is
Nick is right. He's looking at column G.
>> Well, here
>> even if I January,
>> we're still say we could still
potentially save four grand.
>> I mean, what it is now?
>> Yeah, I know. I mean, this is an old
figure,
>> correct? But I don't, Nick, and this is
just me. I don't trust all of the line
items and where everything is put.
That's me. And on those types of items
because you got to remember those are
coming from um the community center and
sorry, some some issues. Yeah, I lost my
v my screens above so my face got dark.
Um, so Nick, while I understand what
you're looking at and you could sit
there and cut that slightly, I don't
think that that's the area I would cut.
Just
>> they're up to 6,200 right now. And don't
forget, there's also that extra
fundraiser
line that I'm I don't think they've
really dug in too much. That's in the L
account.
>> Um, there's a senior lunch account.
That makes sense to me. I'm just saying
if we we could highlight it or something
if we I I just I don't know what the
thoughts are on that. It makes sense to
me. I'm okay with it as is. I just think
if we're looking if we had a you said
$6,000 and that what's the period of
performance for that 6,000? Is that like
halfway through the calendar year?
>> Get through April.
>> No, that's through.
>> Let me go back to it. That's like pretty
up to date like right now.
like 6,200.
>> Yeah.
>> So, if you reject that out for two more
months or May, June, right?
>> Yeah. You're looking at an $8,000 total,
but maxed out run rate. So, we got four
4500 extra in there.
And and I'm just making everyone aware
we we have the kitchen project that has
to happen next year and that's going to
increase the utilization on the kitchen
and all the costs related to condition
the kitchen and what goes into the
lunches. So you can make a cost
reduction on that. It's just not an area
that I think I would want to go at
because we haven't done a good job on
we're trying to do a better job on
utilizing the the community center, but
you know, it's one of the few things our
seniors really get from us.
>> I I I'm fine leaving it alone.
>> Yeah, I'm okay leaving it.
>> It's $4,000. It's
>> You know, we can we we we can talk about
it next year if we're coming in under
again.
>> Yeah, but I I think I'd leave it. Guys,
>> y
>> can I ask where we are? Um Lisa, on
senior trips this year, what have we
what are we up to on senior trips?
Because
>> as of January, it only only looked like
$2.49.
>> Yeah, it's still only around $600
that we've spent on senior trips. Again,
I believe there's an L account for that,
but I I don't think there's a lot of
money in it.
>> You What does that mean, Lisa?
>> What does that mean, L account? Well, as
far as I can tell, and maybe Jeff can
correct me, but if if the town doesn't
put these funds in the budget to do
these items for the basketball, for the
kids, for the seniors, for lunches,
there's fundraising that's gone on and
they're in this separate savings account
that's not in the budget that if they
run short or they want to use that for a
special lunch or a special basketball
program, they can go get that out of
that fund. It's not in the budget and
it's not town money. It's stuff. It's
money they've raised as far as I know. I
mean,
>> I'm not used to this. So, maybe somebody
can make it clearer, but that's what I
can tell.
>> Do we know what's in that? Did you just
tell us and I forgot already?
>> No, I have I only have an idea because I
haven't been able to reconcile those L
accounts. We have like 25 of them
including all the grants
>> and all that. Yeah. in the school, in
the Capitol, and I just haven't had a
chance. I did the Capitol, but that's as
far as I got.
>> Well, what have you been doing?
>> Yeah.
>> My thumbs.
>> Okay.
>> Lisa.
>> Yeah,
>> it's Louise. Isn't there one for the uh
fire department, too? They do
fundraisers that took care of their
ambulance cost.
>> I
>> totally totally different analy. That's
what I was going to say. None of these.
Yeah.
>> Okay.
>> What what what she's addressing is if
>> if I made a donation to the lunch
program, it would go into the L account,
>> right? Oh, come on.
>> Right. It needs to be presented
differently. And that's one of those
items where any of these items because
what Nick was doing is 100% what you
guys should be doing is looking at the
expenditures currently to date and
sitting there and determining if we're
going to spend that much money and
reduce those line items if they can be.
And there's some items that if we just
talk through it, we shouldn't reduce
because we should be doing a better job
of utilizing those funds to to improve
services. So, um, but on the question of
what is going on on school lunch, it's
if somebody makes a donation or there's
money raised
um from the lunches, they would be sit
there and
put into an L account. And Nick, and
I'll say that potentially because what
I'm I'm believing is that some of the
money collected on the lunches has gone
to offset the lunch expenses. So, I
don't believe that that's all the lunch
expenses. I believe that's potentially
the lunch expenses offset by the the the
collections from the seniors. So,
if you wanted to cut that, you could,
but I, you know, it's all a question of
what are our priorities and what do we
want to take care of.
>> So, you if you want to hear you want to
hear my suggestion on that, you leave
the senior lunch program alone. You
know, I there's there's a lot of people
that go to those senior lunchons, and I
go to them pretty frequently, and I
don't see anybody on this call hardly at
all that are participating in those
senior lunches.
>> Okay,
>> I'm
going to keep this tight. I appreciate
you guys. I don't think we're going to
cut it. Just let's let's move on and
let's keep it tight. We got to keep it
to the board. Um and we can get to,
>> you know, more commentary later. Uh, but
no, I I don't think I think we I think
we've talked that one through, guys.
>> I think we move on.
>> Uh, you know, unless there's somebody
who's really hot to trot and wants to
make a motion, I think we move on.
>> Okay. Um, I was down at the
reccomission,
>> right? Now we're in the rec commission.
>> Right. And I mean, it looked to me like
we were expending, you know, this looks
right, you know, and this was only
through January. So, I don't know if
this is increased, Lisa, but it was
looking more or less correct. And we we
had a specific request for a you know a
registration fee and an additional
concert. That's the entire entire $1,400
increase.
>> So what what is the WICSC? Can somebody
remind me what that is?
>> I don't remember the
>> I don't think we ever found out. Um
would have to ask uh Carol. I guess
>> an email asked that question and the
answer was so confusing I I really
couldn't
>> Can you slide over what what is that
saying?
>> I I mean
>> potentially it was
>> Yeah. Isn't that related to the software
program? Because the rec commission was
trying to help the community center with
the the computer program to do the
calendar for the fields and for the
basketball court.
>> But then I thought that Tess indicated
that she had received a grant that was
going to pay for that
if I recall it correctly.
>> And and you're you may you may be right
on that, Kim. So I was really confused
by
what what that all like why why why that
was there. That's my recollection of
that meeting.
>> Um they were going to split some that
money I think and the recreation
commission was going to use some of the
software
some portion of the software.
But
I found my notes from talking to Tess. I
don't see a specific I mean not sorry um
not Tess I I don't I don't know what the
academ stands for. It's not a lot of
money. Um I think we are likely to spend
that line item. Lisa, I don't know if we
have an updated year to date on this,
but
>> I don't see like this is a fertile
ground
>> for us to be cutting.
>> I think we should
>> I don't know. I kind of disagree.
>> Okay. I I I personally would like to see
it stay the 6,000
um
only because we are so tight. Um
and I I personally I sent an email and a
text message asking for like a detailed
breakdown like what what is what is all
this for? and and I didn't get a
response and I followed up and I didn't
get a response and I just
I don't know. We we paid 2425 actuals
$5,000.
Uh is it necessary to have an additional
concert? I'm not sure. I don't know. I I
would make a motion to
keep it $6,000
just under the current circumstance with
us facing this
um budget crunch.
>> All right. Liz moves to reduce 603870
programs from the direct commission from
7,400 down to 6,000. That's a $1,400
cut. Do we have a second on that?
>> I'll second that.
>> Louise seconds. Any further discussion?
Okay, we'll go ahead and take a vote.
Bill,
>> I I wish I knew more about the WICSC.
I'm going to say no just because I
really don't understand it. So,
>> okay. Uh Liz, your motion. So,
>> yes.
>> Liz is a yes. Louise,
>> Okay.
Kim,
>> yes.
>> Heather,
>> There's a yes.
Nick.
>> Yes.
>> I'll vote no. I don't I don't just don't
I don't I don't like it. Uh okay. So
that I passes 52 unless I missed
anybody.
Um but back to 6K.
All right.
Um, all right. There's not much more
here.
These are percentage wise, but they're
tiny numbers. Um,
we specifically added this last time.
anybody. All right. I mean, unless
there's stuff in here, these are tiny
numbers. I I personally would leave
them. Uh we can talk about capital
again, but as you guys know, we made
some adjustments last time um or in the
budget process.
Um, my personal gut feel is I would
rather take from unexpended fund balance
than cut some of these, but I'm open. I
I'm flexible on that. Uh, I don't want
there are some funds here I'd really
rather not touch. Um, but I want to hear
your thoughts. If anybody has
ideas of uh you know where we where we
could find a cut then okay.
>> Um and we don't have those balances
in front of us either.
>> Uh we had a rough draft from Lisa a
while back.
>> We should have put those in that memo
column back when we were working on
this.
>> I You're right. I That's a really good
point.
>> I have it in front of me.
>> Oh, you do. Can you give us the balances
and we put them in the memo column right
now by any chance?
>> Um, let me look. I just want to make
sure I'm giving you the right one. New
outweighs. Okay. Now, don't forget this
was as of February. Is that when we did
this?
>> Let's see. All right.
>> Was enough. Let's see.
Um,
it's been a long time since I looked at
this. Let's see. Reserve Bank.
No, close to me.
>> Okay.
fiscal year to date balance. All right.
On the reval, let's see, is 63
847.
And
>> and of course, we need to
>> contingent is 39104.
>> 39104.
>> Multiuse building.
>> Really? Okay.
>> Is 450
544. Wait, how much is in the multi-use
building fund?
>> 450544.
>> 450 544. I'm sorry, it cut out on me. I
heard 50 and was like, what?
>> I heard that, too.
>> I did too.
>> That's all right. Okay, go on. Go on.
>> Fire. Let's see the fire.
Oh, the sale of asset was a question
with that, but it stands at 413054.
Let's see. Public works
230.
Um road improvements
085.
Um tree removal.
There was a little issue with going back
and forth
um
with the tree because remember transfer
station and the tree it was to be
determined I wouldn't count on more than
14,000
um building maintenance
>> 23759
>> that's bridge
>> that's bridge and cover but hang on What
was building maintenance?
>> I have building maintenance 23759.
>> Wrong line.
>> Oh, no. I'm sorry. You're good.
>> No, I got it.
>> Yep. Bridging Culver.
>> Bridging Culver.
>> Well, bridge and Culvert. I didn't get
to bridge and Culvert. That's why you
can't see it because that wasn't list.
It was listed over in the grants. It
wasn't listed in capital.
>> It was in Yeah, I mean it's in the
audit.
>> It's with all the grants and so I didn't
get into that.
>> It's in the audit. It's a healthy
number, but we need a lot in there. I I
I want to say we had about we were
pushing 600k but that's I
>> but I have determined yeah what payments
had been made and
>> that's not one we can fund that we can
mess with I don't want to mess with that
anyway right
>> um
let's see
>> how about the open
>> the building maintenance was 23759
>> um the AES S capital Capital
>> 496
871,
>> right? And we just approved 220 to come
out of that for the bathroom project.
>> Yeah. And
>> open space.
>> Open space.
That one is off also. I'm showing
41,000, but I can't guarantee that. So,
I couldn't get I couldn't get that one
to reconcile.
>> Okay. The other thing I'll mention with
road improvement, we never show I know
in the audit it lists another fund, the
town a road fund. I assume that's where
we put our town aid road money. And I
remember there being a balance in there,
but that you know, we don't have to get
in too far into that. I would expect
we're going to start, if we haven't
already, as the weather has warmed up,
we're going to be using we're going to
be expending
from from here. And and don't forget, I
mean, these are something I did, you
know, I did as best as I could. I
I took what I could find and put this
together with the audit. I matched it to
the audit and what was in QuickBooks,
and this is what I could find. So, but
I'm pretty sure that these are, you
know, relative to what's in there.
>> All right.
>> And it was a couple what, three months
ago?
>> Yeah. Do does anybody know what does it
cost to do revaluation? I mean, we have
63847. Does anybody know what the cost
is to do the revaluation?
>> And the thing is we our reval got pushed
back a year, didn't it?
>> It did. So, we're actually in the sixth
year. So, I'm just wondering what I
don't know if Jeff or somebody else
online knows what it actually cost us to
do that.
>> It cost them he's he's gotten quotes for
like $66,000 last couple times in that
ballpark.
>> And we have to do it next year, right?
>> Next year.
>> So, I'm sorry, Jeff, you said 40 grand.
I'm sorry.
>> 66.
So
>> in theory we could make a minor cut
there but it's it's about right. It's
>> about right then.
>> It'll be a little over but we we also
also have to re start refilling it
afterwards.
>> Yeah. We got to leave that one.
>> So what where what is the the fund
balance? Like we also have a fund
balance.
>> We have our unassigned fund balance.
It's 2.1 million.
>> If you look at the audit that's the
unassigned fund balance was 2.1 which
they calculated at 15.1%.
And obviously that's a moving target
because if you change the outlays then
you you change your operating budget
then obviously that number can shift.
But that's what we were at. We were at
2.1 million.
>> And what is that's where I would say we
could we could bring that down. We could
take a hundred,000. We we'd still have
$2 million. Uh I think we'd still be in
good shape.
>> What what is the percentage that we're
that they like us to have? between 12
and 15% you think
>> between 12 and 15
>> I mean do you remember that meeting we
had where was one of Eric's last
meetings where he was talking to us
about new guidance from the state on
that how they were saying they wanted
two months which is you know one sixth
which is a little higher than that
but I think honestly I think we're in
we're in a pretty good place there I but
I wouldn't want to go crazy I just I
think we could take a modest amount and
re-evaluate next year.
>> I don't I don't want, you know, I don't
want to reduce a lot.
>> Yeah, I think the fact that we have no
debt, I mean, this is just my common
sense brain. Since we have no debt, I
think we're in pretty good shape in that
department,
right? Right. I mean, if we had
>> a lot of debt, then I think we might
have to go on the higher side of that um
fun that unassigned fund balance, right?
I mean, am I thinking right?
>> Yeah. I mean, it's also it's just about
it's it's a massive contingency figure,
you know, in case of all sorts of
possibilities. Um,
thankfully, knock wood. I've never seen
us in an emergency situation where we
had to tap it. But, you know, I I'd like
to stay within the guidance. You know, I
if in that 12 to 15% range, I'd like to
be in there. Maybe even a touch higher
if if I had a perfect world, which we
don't have. But I I really do think we
could stand to to use a little bit of it
to just help this year, help cushion
things a little bit, reduce that tax
increase. So
I I agree with that, but we're still in
this this section right here.
>> Mhm.
>> Capital.
So, I'm just and and nobody nobody jump
out of their seats here on the tree
removal fund, which I'm 100% for and I
know that we need that, but are we
spending 50,000 a year and how do we get
up to have 140,000? Am I right?
>> No, you said 14,000.
>> 14,000 is left. I'm sorry. I'm sorry.
I'm going to shut up now. Forget that
hole.
>> It's all good.
>> Good try, Bill.
>> I don't think I don't think we have a
ton in there. Um,
>> you know,
>> no, I leave that alone. I was I thought
it said 140,000. I looked at it quick. I
was like, what? Okay, never mind.
>> Um,
>> do we have
this? Do we have a lot of tree removal
left to do? Like I feel like they've
been doing a lot of work on it already.
>> It's been a multi-year process where
we've really caught up
>> caught up. And what it and the way it
worked, the way Eric had it working was
we we had a deal with Eversource where
we would mobilize on the same day,
partner up with them and get a lot done.
Um, so it's been very successful. I
don't know. And I think my fe my gut
feeling on this. What I would say is I'd
love to see Matt be in there for a year
and get his arms around everything and
then talk to us next year about do we
need to maintain at that level or are we
at such a point where we could back it
off slightly. But I I I think personally
I think we've made such strides. I think
it's been worth every penny. Um, I don't
know about you guys, but there was a
stretch there where I seem to lose power
every time we had a storm, and now
things are just dramatically better.
>> That's why I was asking like, are we
have we caught up or not?
>> No, that's a it's a really good
question. I I I don't know the answer to
the question off the top of my head. So,
>> we're not we're not at all. Uh, Rob, and
uh, the tree warden is has already spent
a lot of that money and the money for
this this year. And I would say that
I've already had two trees come down
within the last month on Bear Swamp.
>> Okay. Well, I'd leave it alone then.
>> If you drive around town,
>> you will see there's still a lot of dead
trees
>> around the town. And so I I'm not really
in favor of cutting that this year.
>> I agree with Bill. I mean, tree removal
is so expensive. It's shocking
>> how much
>> Lisa Lisa, one thing. I mean, we got to
come back on this at some point because
I I could have sworn there was a little
more money in the open space fund than
than $41,000. But
>> Bob, I remember around 237, I think.
>> That sounds right. That sounds right.
>> Yes. The 41,000 is what's in QuickBooks
and I said it like was to be determined
because the bank balance, you're right,
says 234, but I didn't have a chance to
go back and reconcile. Is that the
correct amount? And why is it so
different than QuickBooks?
>> All right.
>> So,
>> all right. Again, that's what I'm trying
to figure out. I don't know if it's an
egregious amount. I think I think I'd
leave that, too. I I we added a little
more money back in there, but because we
had we had cut it a couple years back.
So,
I mean, last year. So, I I think
restoring some of that funding is good.
We're not all the way back up to the 50K
that we put in 24.
>> Yeah.
>> 25.
>> Um, so I I I don't really want to do
anything there. Bridg Culver, we've
talked about repeatedly. I just feel
like
that that's a that's a fund where we
could put every dollar we could scrape
together in and and we we need it.
>> Yeah. The money's been calculated out,
Rob. The money has been calculated out
for the number of projects that we have
and what they're going to cost and when
they're planned to be done. So, you
really can't touch
>> No.
>> No,
>> you can't touch it.
>> No, I wouldn't. I wouldn't. has to be
funded at that rate for the next years
because it's going to be done 28. Yes.
>> Right. Work's already been lined up so
you can't mess with that number.
>> The only other thing was, you know, when
we on our public works, we have a new
director, but I, you know, I want to
revisit their capital plan at some point
um to see whether this is the
appropriate funding level for public
works equipment. Uh we don't have a ton
in there, so uh you know, I'm not
necessarily in favor of cutting that
either. It is a place we could tweak,
but you know, because we do have some
money in there, but it's it's not a lot.
And I don't, you know, I think we've
done a better a decent job of getting
our equipment more up to date, but they,
you know, needs come up. So,
>> equipment is expensive, but we do have a
lot of new.
>> Jeff, do you have new trucks? We have
new
>> drivers, mowers,
>> you know, I know that Liz said we don't
have any debt, but this is one of the
areas where we do have debt on the plow
truck that we purchased, and that money
is to pay the the
>> financing every year.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. And then and similarly, you know,
we have the tanker truck that we're
paying off.
>> Yeah. Those two those two line items are
are loan payments or lease payments,
whatever, however you want to
categorize.
>> Lease payments. So, the majority of that
125 for public works is for the lease
payment on the last plow truck we
bought,
>> right?
>> And and and remember, they were not
supposed to get any additional money
money until that plow truck was paid
off.
>> All right.
>> Well, I don't you know, I don't we
already nipped and tucked here.
I'm low to reduce anymore. But if
anybody has any on the board
>> disagrees with me, speak now.
>> Well, I think we got to go to the next
subject where Liz was talking about
earlier and well, we all were and
that's, you know,
the fund that we have $2.1 million
sitting there and um
>> and I think we could use $100,000 of
that money.
>> I I I would I would like to. Yes. to to
try and help here.
>> I'd like to add one other thing. Um the
community garden. Can we look at that
again?
>> We cut it.
>> We cut it pretty heavily, but
>> Yeah, we did.
>> Well, it was cut because of the um $600
for seeds, which is a bit
>> I thought it was 300.
>> We cut it by 300 and some odd so that we
could put that money toward the DMV
lookups.
>> Right. Right. But what's the rest of the
budget?
It's we already I mean
>> I think there's a um irrigation. Isn't
there something has to be finished with
the irrigation?
>> I don't see it in there
>> from what I remember.
>> It's under It's near the wreck. It's
near the wreck commission.
>> Yeah. 45503 is wreck
>> and and I know what's his name came on.
I'm sorry I can't remember his name
right now. They came on and talked
extensively about, you know, what that
money was. Did
>> I go too far?
>> Sorry, these are just not in
>> Jeff Ballard. He came on and talked
pretty extensively about I think it's
the irrigation system if I'm not wrong.
>> Yeah.
>> And beds. I don't remember if they were
putting in more raised beds. I forget.
>> Uh and he said something about a new
Didn't he say something about a rotor
tiller and you offered to give him one?
>> Yeah, I know. I I need to get I need to
get back to one. I really do have one.
>> He bought one.
>> Okay.
>> I said, "Oh, I got one I could give
you." Oh, well. Um,
>> sorry. Having trouble finding
>> We can't see the left hand.
>> Which column are you looking for, guys?
>> It was It was up above.
>> Oh, no.
>> It was right in the middle.
>> Where? Where was it? Yeah, it was right
in the middle. I just this is such a
small figure
>> right under library
>> and before Memorial Day before selecting
>> Memorial Day. So did I already pass it?
>> I think you did.
>> Oh, for goodness sakes.
>> Go slower. Just go.
>> I know. I apologize.
>> Bob, you're zippy.
>> I'm too I'm trying to get through this.
>> Go down to boards and commissions.
>> Yep.
>> This is near the end.
>> Stop.
Okay.
>> 1680.
>> We we we cut them from last year. So, I
mean
>> I I'm assuming part of it was this
number, but we you know, we were in the
middle of the winter.
>> Yeah. And they spent it last year. Look
at this 5124.
>> I know. But I I feel that we should cut
a little bit more because I'm not seeing
the community service type of thing
coming from this. It's more individual
and I I I don't feel comfortable paying
our money to just like three or four
people.
You want to make a
>> I mean the gardens are there which are
beautiful and very nice for people to
use but
>> they're all six of them are empty towns
I guess. Oh and I guess is it the town's
job to subsidize
gardens for a handful of people. I guess
it's kind of my question. That's kind of
my question.
I'd like to I'd like to make a motion to
reduce the budget from 3 3180 to to 2180
>> to take a,000 cut.
>> Yes.
>> All right. Louise moves to reduce 603890
community garden by $1,000 from these
are hard times to 2180. Do we have a
second?
I'll
>> second it. Liz seconds. We have any
further discussion?
All right, I'll just go in order. Liz,
>> yes.
>> Bill,
>> no.
>> Nick,
>> Louise,
>> yes.
>> Kim,
>> Heather,
>> no.
>> And I'm a no. So, that motion fails. 34.
We leave it at 3180.
>> That worked.
We can revisit it next year. We'll see
what happens. Um, can we go back to
Let's go back down
unless there's something else in
particular. So, we were at capital. I
think we've kind of talked through this.
Unless there's a motion somebody wants
to make. I just don't see anything here.
I'm really comfortable cutting. So, I
don't have a motion here. Um,
>> yeah. So it looks like it looks like the
cuts that we made brought us down to the
town side a 5.59.
>> Yep.
>> From 612.
>> 5.59 expenditures town. Yes.
>> Yep. Right. For a total a total decrease
tonight of 16,783. Is that right?
>> I think it was.
>> Where did you get the 783? I got
>> I had 6,900.
I got 15
>> I mean 15 sorry 16
>> 164 no
>> 164 164 sorry I was doing bad math
>> you got the 783 list
>> uh well I just took um the original
budget and I subtracted where we are now
which is 3 million34954
so my initial starting point might be
wrong because I it was 3 million 363737
that's probably where
>> oh That's a different number. Yeah.
>> Can you can you just go to the
>> slide up,
>> Rob? To the rec commission again because
that's the other change. What's that
number?
>> The 1400
>> right there.
>> This was a $1,400.
>> Yep.
>> Reduction.
>> Was it 1400 or 12?
>> 14.
>> 14 because it was at 74.
>> But back to 6K.
>> 6K. I should have said I should have
said
>> minus 1,400
>> so that I know what the heck it was. But
yes, it was 1,400 cuz they had asked for
7,400.
>> Yep.
>> So that's how you get to 164.
>> Okay. So 16400 is the total difference.
Anyways, the point is and I do have one
as I say to my husband.
So, we're down to a 5.9% increase. Um,
which is
>> balanced out balanced out with a minus
2.92 from the capital.
What does that net out?
Well, I mean, we'd have to go to the
we'd have to go to the other chart to
see the impact on taxation, but I can
tell you that every $100,000 is about 1%
um of a tax increase, right? So, if you
cut
>> 16, you know, you you've cut,
you know,
about 16 to 1% out of the tax increase.
So, we you know, we have more to do. I
mean we have we have if we take if we
have the hund you know almost 100 from
the state we have if we take a 100 from
fund balance you know that's like 2%.
With addition to what we just did so
instead of being at a 6.7 tax increase
we'd be about 4.7 at that
>> Val had mentioned that there was another
$50,000.
>> Well yeah I thought it was $49,000 was
my understanding where Okay. So what it
is is in the 2526 budget
>> a 2425 budget. Apologies. The AES 2425
budget, the the one that you know is in
the audit that's about to be completed,
they had an underspend there, whereas
they have an overspend this this budget
cycle, but last year they had an
unspend. They put can put money in the
2% non-lapsing, but it's capped
obviously. So, if you take if you net it
out, they put in I think it's 87,000 or
so they can put into the 2% non-lapsing.
The remaining figure of the underspend
was $49,000 which could be returned to
the town. Um, you know, the original
thought on the board of ed was, well,
you know, could we put it in our capital
fund? But now that we've had the
bathroom project come in at half the
cost we had feared, uh, I think they're
they're going to be okay with just
saying, you know, it comes back to the
town,
>> right?
>> So that's another $49,000.
So from
>> Yes.
>> Does that
>> you know to income?
>> So if you if you think of it this way,
right? We have
>> I'm going to do just fuzzy math for a
second. Yeah. You have 98,000 from the
state, you have 49,000 from AAS and if
if you guys agree with me, you know,
and take 100 from fund balance, right?
You're just about you're just shy of
250.
>> And then you got the 16 that we just
talked about that we just
>> Right. Right. And correct. Yeah, you're
right. You're right.
>> 16 more in there.
>> Yeah. Yep. Yep. Yep. So, and this is
fuzzy math for for a second because
we'll go to we'll do the right math when
we go to the other chart, but you know,
you're a little over 250 there. You know
that get two if that's a 2.6%
you're coming from from 6.7. So, you'd
be at 4
um one
at that point. But before we do anything
to the AS budget
um you know and so that's what so that's
the thing to talk about if well again
this is n this is my suggestion for fund
balance we haven't actually passed that
>> uh you know and you know I want to hear
what other people think if that's the
right number if you think it's too high
too low um
>> I think we should concentrate on AES
right now
>> and do our reduction with that and then
look at the fund balance at that point
>> I'm okay with I'm okay with that will go
in order. I mean that you know the other
thing to remember that's the other thing
guys we this is a
>> we don't know what's going to happen
here but what I would say is that I
guarantee this number will fall
>> the RAM le
>> right
>> how much
>> we're talking though we're not talking
AES
>> I just wanted to mention that I wanted
to mention that in context now we're
going to talk about AES
>> okay
>> but it's going to lower our overall
>> yeah it's just I just wish you know
we're just not going to be ble to know
what it is unfortunately until
that night, you know, until they they
make they take action on Tuesday night,
>> right?
>> So, unfortunately, it it's just a it's
just something to keep in mind. So,
whatever you're thinking, you know,
whatever you want to think of as your
target, just keep that in the back of
your mind. That's all. Mhm.
>> Just just because I know you guys are
talking about how to pay this, but the
total town increase, if my numbers are
right from what I'm reading at the
bottom of this. So, I take the municipal
budget for last year, the municipal
capital budget for last year, and then
what you're currently being requested or
what's being currently requested. It's a
$147,272
increase or 3.51%
Just so you're all aware because it's
really hard to read the way that you
guys with the way that this is set up.
>> Yeah.
>> So,
>> are you saying in
>> in expenses uh Jeff or
>> No, the expenses are right at 5.99 and
then you have a negative 2.92
for capital budget. But if you just take
them in total and you add the the town
municipal budget for last year and the
capital budget for last year, you get
4.198433.
And currently the request is 4,345704.
Difference is 147, you know, 2027
or, you know, depending upon where my I
was I was trying to do this while Rob
was moving the screen. So, but I'm
coming to three and 3.51%
increase is what is being proposed right
now with the cuts that you guys made and
where we're at.
>> Right.
>> Lisa, can you do me a favor while we're
deliberating on as stuff?
>> Can you send me the um the tax rate
calculation chart again?
You got you got somebody everybody mute,
please.
>> Mute your phone. Jody.
>> Jody.
>> Thank you.
>> All right. Yeah. So, Lisa, just I want
to make sure I have the most upto-date
one that we went into town meeting with.
>> Okay.
>> Because we're gonna That's the That's
the one we're going to need to flip to
once we've sort of made our
>> Okay.
>> Last changes here.
So again, we just talked about how we
made a
slight 16 16 and a half thousandish cut
to the on the town side. Um I would
my just conceptually my thought on this
was um I was looking at the advisory
questions and I'm thinking okay
a modest cut to a AES as well more a
little more than the town side because
the advisory questions indicate more
people thought it was high. Uh but I you
know personally I would be I would be c
judicious here. I'd be cautious here.
So, I want to hear other people's
thoughts, but you know, when I when I
was thinking about this, I was thinking,
you know, a modest cut to the town and
then maybe, you know,
one and a half, two times that for AES
and then see what the numbers with fund
balance use and everything and see what
the number comes out at. And then if we
don't like that number, we can uh we can
journey onward. We can talk about doing
more. But that's that's my thinking.
That's just where I'm at. What do you
guys want to do?
>> Well, they've already take, you know,
we've already received aboutund and
well, not 150. How much for for
education?
>> It's like 163 we're at now, Bill,
because this this, you know, this is my
fund balance suggestion. We haven't done
it. So, we have the education
specifically for education.
>> Oh, it was 80. We're going to receive 80
>> 80,000 plus the 50,000 that we just
discussed 49,000,
>> right?
>> So that's 120.
So we've already reduced our burden on
AES by hundred and something thousands.
>> Yeah.
>> 80 plus 49, right? 129. Is that correct?
>> Yeah. I mean the education money. Yeah.
It's it's bear in mind, you know, that's
that's RAM, but yeah. So the other way
to look at it is so far we're down 163.
We're down net it out down 163 in terms
of what we need to raise in taxes
because of the
um
the various aid we've received
and the 16 you know.4 that we made cuts
you know. So, so all I'm saying is if we
did take the 100,000 like we talked
about earlier from the fund, okay, the
leftover fund, the 2.1, we took a 100,
that puts us at 263. I guess my question
is, what does the board feel our goal
should be that we should get down to?
What is a passable budget in the board's
mind? What is our target?
>> So, I have I have some thoughts, of
course. Mhm. Um
the
the vote indicated people felt the AES
budget was too high.
So I'm not talking about what is going
to end up um how we pay for it. Um I'm
thinking of the expenditures and an 11%
increase in expenditures I think is the
problem. U and I think we we all knew it
was going to be a problem. We tried to
get them down to 7 and 1/2 and um
someone on the board rejected that. Um
I think we got here in a in a couple of
ways. You know, last year they had
requested
an 8% I think
>> 8.8.8
and we gave them five. So
>> we gave them we gave them five. Um
>> 8.5 I think.
>> No, five. Okay,
>> gave them five. And they wanted the 8.8
to well, one of the drivers was to hire
3.1 new FTE,
two of which were school teachers for
fourth and fifth grade
and 1.1
was for additional specialist teachers
and part of a I think math
interventionalist.
Um,
so when that was changed, uh, back down
to 5%.
They made minimal changes throughout the
budget to meet that to meet that
threshold, but didn't
um change their goals, you know, so they
still hired the people they wanted to
hire. Um,
so now we're in a point where they, you
know, they hired the people and now they
want to hire another sixth grade
teacher, which,
you know, we can't tell them how to
spend the money. I I get that. I just
want to kind of explain like a process
that I went through to kind of um cuz
last last time when I tried to make a
recommendation, Bill said, "Well, what
how did you come up with this number?
Like what are you what are you thinking
about?" So I think that was a very good
point and so I kind of did some math and
kind of came up with some thoughts. Um I
personally uh when you look at the
enrollment that they have every year it
looks like um there are 25 children
right now in the fifth grade class. And
I personally think hiring a sixth grade
teacher
right now for 25 students after they've
been this awesome sixth grade teacher
has been handling more than that. I so I
question I question that. But I also
I also want to discuss and I don't mean
to beat a dead horse. I want to discuss
the preschool because
preschool does in fact affect the
general fund because part of the
increases for the FTEES were to increase
some of the specialist teachers and that
got me looking at like well what what
else does preschool affect? And if you
look into the um the preschool pamphlet,
so they use they use they use everything
the school uses pretty much. Um they use
the art teacher, gym teacher, music,
speech, librarian,
um and I also believe the instructional
tech person.
Um we know that we are covering the
benefits uh and FICA that stuff. Um, and
then I would argue they're probably
using the psych the psych services,
occupational therapy, PT possibly. Um,
and they're probably using a lot more.
Okay. But
those are some areas that I kind of
concentrated on. And in past years,
there were two preschool classes.
And then there was a decision made to
expand the preschool.
For whatever reason, we won't know
because that decision was made in an
executive session. So, we really don't
know why. Um, but when you look at the
number of classrooms in the school,
four out of 17 right now are preschool.
So I did a little math and I looked at
okay four out of preschool and I did a
div I I divided so I I got a percentage
four out of 17 is 23 and a2%.
And if you add up all those expenses
that I talked about,
the total of those expenses is $499.91
and 23% of that is 400,876.
If you
>> Wait, are you sure about the math on
that? Wait a minute. You said the total
was
>> 49. So, the total of the total of those
items that I talked about is 4.
>> Oh, no. I'm sorry. I take that. No, no,
no, no. I'm wrong. I'm wrong. That was
the Never mind. I'm wrong on that. I'm
looking at the difference.
>> Yeah.
>> Nope. I'm wrong on that.
>> Can I Liz, can I interrupt for one
second just to make a point?
>> Yep.
>> I really don't think I I you know those
the building is the building. No matter
how many kids you have in that school,
the building is the building. I'm not a
believer in that kind of concept. What I
am and and listen, I'll take
responsibility for for my letter and and
what I wrote and I'm really honest about
the whole thing. The the lever that the
school and the board of education have
not sat there and pulled is the tuition
that the families are charged.
>> Right. I am all for I am all for a great
quality preschool education for kids. I
am. I just don't think that the
community should be supporting that. And
and the information that the board of
education receives on a monthly basis to
sit there and say that's a financial
breakdown of the prek program is is not
that's not it. I'm an accountant. I sit
there look at this stuff all the time
and all I'm like that's not what you
need to provide.
>> And so
I I'm just I'm a believer. I love the
fact that they're utilizing the the
school and the classrooms and they can
do it. But you have four certified
teachers, four paras, all the other
services that Liz's talking about. And
if
Scott Soyette is telling people in his
information that the town is paying
$100,000
for the prek, you can guarantee it's
three to $400,000.
>> So I'll just sit there and you just need
to go over the numbers. You need the
data. This is all I've ever been sitting
there trying to say. People get mad at
me in meetings and town meetings. Just
provide the information and we can all
make an intelligent decision for the
best interests of everybody in the
community and that includes kids and
seniors and everything else. But please
just provide the info. So
>> agree. So I guess my point is
in the original in you know original way
it was we were we had four employees
there right two teachers two parents now
we have eight employees and and I'm not
talking about dividing up all the
expenses of the school the school is the
school but there are certain things that
have increased because the amount of
children have increased so I mean you
could save $190 $7,000
by cutting back to two classrooms and we
would still be fulfilling the obligation
that we have to special ed. We would
still be providing a wonderful preschool
um to the community.
>> That together with
>> holding off on hiring a sixth grade
teacher could save us $280,000.
Um
because two rooms, two classrooms, and
I'm not even
>> like that'd be like 26 27 kids per per
room if if if you cut way no more than
that.
>> Well, no, you you would you would have
to go back to the way you used to have
like why do we have to be why do we have
to solve the problem of the preschool
desert?
>> I'm talking about even if you removed
all out of town kids, you'd still be in
50 some odd kids. Look, um,
>> because you can't remove those kids.
>> We have, we have, you know, Kate would
like to to speak. Val would like to
speak. Do you guys want to talk to the
school of board about this or, you know,
>> or you have or are you building up to a
motion here?
>> Well, I would build up to a motion, but
um
>> because I don't know if this is really
accurate, but
>> I'm trying to ex Can I can I just say
something about the prek program as
well?
When I I did a lot of research on
different towns with preks. So,
Columbia,
Connecticut has two prek classes. They
collect, I think, five or $6,000 from
the kids. And any money that they
collect goes back to the town because
it's run in a school building or a town
owned building. In Marlboro,
Connecticut, they have half day prek and
it's only open to
um Marlboro's kids and it's free. If
parents need prek to go to work or they
want their kids, they pay for a private
program called Mecca
um to utilize to to pay. So there are
instances where things are done a little
bit differently.
>> I just
>> I think that's a good question. I kind
of would I I think we have some folks
from the board of ed here that are
probably educated in this and I would
like to pick their brain while they're
on the call if we could do that. I think
Valerie raised her hand.
>> But I thought this was not public speak
at this point. I think we need to make a
motion and continue. We've had such a
bad
recognize certain subject matter if we
want.
>> Excuse me, Rob. I need to we need to
continue doing what we're doing as a
board trying to listen to the town
people stating that the the school
budget is way too high. We need to do an
adjustment to that. So, we're just
trying to educate each other.
>> Louise, can I interject for
>> We need to educate ourselves.
>> Please, please include them in the
conversation. It's the only way we'll
ever get information.
>> Thank you.
>> I may not ever get information. I may
not ever get the information I want, but
your board should because your board
needs to make decisions on the town's
behalf on how we spend the money. So, if
you don't get the information and the
knowledge from the people at the board
of education, if we they don't ever give
us the details, you can never make a
good decision, you're going to be
shooting in the dark right now with
whatever change you want to make. So,
listen to them.
>> Okay, I stand corrected and I didn't
know whether that was proper uh rules to
do.
>> We've been doing it all night. We've
been calling on experts.
>> We can call on experts if we want.
>> Okay. So I would suggest
>> I would suggest that we hear from Kate
and we hear from Val on this issue and
then we should move forward with what
Liz was building towards and and you
know actually entertain motions here. So
if that's okay I'd like to go ahead and
call on Kate
>> or Val to explain. you know, was it
okay?
>> Hi.
>> Um, so I'll be really brief. Um, just a
couple points to what Liz mentioned. Um,
so one of the reasons for expanding
classrooms, I don't know if you guys are
aware, but we changed the required age
for entering kindergarten in the state
of Connecticut to five. So kids are in
prek for years three, four, and five.
That happened a couple of years ago. Um
so if you look at the increase in the
classroom sizes that explains why
because kids are now in pre-k for three
years instead of two. Um additionally
you can't just look at the number of
children in a prek program and divide
the total um estimated cost of something
by the number of kids and say you're
subtracting that amount from the budget
for the services they use. Uh the town
is required to provide special education
to any child who ages out of birth to
three up until they reach going to
kindergarten which is age five. So from
age three, four and five. Any kid who
qualifies for special education of which
a lot of the services you mentioned
psychology, speech, OT, PT, all of those
are considered special education. Those
would be required to be given to those
children free of cost until they reach
kindergarten, regardless of whether or
not we have a pre-K program. And we're
actually taking advantage of grants um
to reduce the cost of that to the
taxpayer by having a prek program. If we
didn't have the program, the cost of
those services for those children would
actually be higher than it currently is
and would be an increased cost in the
budget. Um, aside from that, I'll let
Val talk about more specifics for you
guys.
>> Just so, um, we're clear. I do
understand that we are responsible for
the special ed portion of it. I I
totally get that. I've never never
disputed that.
>> Right. So, but but when you talk about
um like calculating a cost per child and
subtracting a certain amount, it's not
it's not like apples to apples. You
can't say the cost of each kid is the
same. Just like you can't say the number
of kids in a sixth grade classroom last
year, which was, I believe, at 29 for
the majority of the year, those 29 kids
are not the same 24 kids that will enter
sixth grade next year, right? Like like
an IEP or a 504 plan has to be taken
into account when you talk about how
many kids can be or should be in a
classroom. That's all.
>> Thanks, Kate.
>> Bel.
>> Yep. So, I I'm a little confused about a
few double standards, though, because
earlier tonight, we talked about needing
some assistance on the town side to
assist with jobs to help Matt Streer, to
help other positions and and and I think
that's great, but now, um, Liz, I I know
you said, but if those teachers last
year managed to do the same job with the
same number of kids, let them do it
again this year. So that I I think is
not fair to teachers. Just because they
were struggling through a very large
class and doing an amazing job for a
year doesn't mean that we should expect
them to continue to do that impossible
job forever. That I would like to say we
have amazing teachers. about the
increase in staff. From 2015 to 2020, we
lost 6.5 staff members when the
enrollment went down and they didn't get
them back. So, when you speak last year
of some changes over and above those two
teachers, that was to start to get it
back for our increase of K6 students.
When we did add a fourth grade and a
fifth grade last year, that's two more
gym classes, two more art classes, two
more library classes. That has nothing
to do with preschool. That had to do
with the fact that we added another
fourth and fifth grade class. Um 18 is
what you're going to put in each of
those max each of those preschool
classes. Two classes is 36. That doesn't
even cover the Andover kids that live in
town. And if you've looked at other
programs that are free or half day, they
are fully special education programs and
they bring in no money, which means that
there is a line item in that town's
budget to cover at least the teacher and
the parah that are in the room as well
as other expenses. And we don't have
that. I do think you said it right at
the beginning when you said, "I hate to
beat a dead course." And when we talk
about tuition, the tuition issue is
something that um will be looked at just
as soon as OEC and the state department
of education in the next 24 months, 12
hopefully actually, decide what the
changes to universal preschool are. At
this point, they're building the plane
as it flies unfortunately and we've got
to kind of go with that. But we have the
four classes. You couldn't put your and
over responsibilities in two classes,
Liz. That that just isn't going to
happen. Um I do hope that during the
course of this year, we'll have multiple
workshops for parents and the community
as that program at the state level gets
rolled out further. We have a parent
ambassador that will be doing that,
Doris Maldonado, so that everybody
understands the changes to the preschool
program. The last thing I will say there
and then Rob if you have a question
please by all means let me know. Um the
tuition doesn't affect this because the
tuition no matter what that is something
a parent will get a tuition agreement
this summer. They'll get a tuition
agreement this summer and they'll know
what they're paying moving forward. Um
unless they're a a grant slot. We don't
even have all of the enrollment yet for
next year. I couldn't tell you right now
what the anticipated enrollment for next
year is. I can tell you what we're
working on right now for this current
year, but we're still enrolling for next
year right now. So, I I couldn't even
tell you if it's going to be 250, if
it's going to be 300. I have no idea.
Um, and we are better off to have um the
grants. Those are solid. Those are
anticipated. Those are expected. We know
what's coming in. So the last thing is I
don't like that we keep saying them they
they're us. They are Andover residents.
It's they're they're they're there's not
anything wrong with them.
>> Uh at the beginning when we say well
they they use the school. Of course they
do. Uh so does pickle ball. So does
basketball. So do the the town residents
use our gym. Everybody does. They're us.
They're part of us. The Andover
residents. So if there's any
You muted yourself.
>> Any other questions?
>> Any other questions? But I don't see how
this affects what we're doing right now.
>> I I have I have one two two questions
actually. One is um are any of the grant
dollars used on out of town children?
>> No, the grant dollars are used on slots.
It doesn't this the state they're on
slots.
>> Okay. So, so when you reduce tuition,
none of the out of town students are
getting reduced tuition.
>> Our out of town students know when they
come there to fill a slot. They can't be
special education because we would have
to provide other services at the
taxpayer expense. So, we don't take out
of town students that are special
education and they pay full tuition.
>> Okay. And then you said you can't
you can't give us a total number of
students. You already know what your
Andover kindergarten should be for next
year or reasonably close. Do you have
any kind of idea I mean as to the number
of students for Andover that'll be K
through six?
>> K through six.
>> Yeah.
>> Well, sure. Um it's our current our
current enrollment that's there now
>> and the children that are moving up from
prek to K, they're still doing
screenings on waiverss. So we we should
have uh a more permanent number um but
the end of May.
>> Okay. Well, what's the number currently
in K through six?
>> In K through six, what is it? 198
>> 192 I thought it was val. Did it go up?
>> I don't have it in front of me. I'm at
home. But whatever the number is from
the board of education packet that went
out this week, that's the number.
>> All right. I'll have to double check,
but I remember it being 192.
>> Go ahead, Bill. Bill.
>> Well, first of all, I think Liz should
be able to finish her point, but then I
would I would like to just ask two
clarifying questions, but I think
>> Lyn, go ahead and ask your clarifying
questions, then we can get on to making
I I think my first thing is maybe
they're not questions so much as but
Val, as I was listening to Caitlyn talk,
it sounds as if we actually save money
by having this grant and having this
program and taking out oftown kids is
all part of that grant. So, if we didn't
have it, the taxpayer would actually
have a higher bill. There would be line
items in your budget to pay for prek
program, but we don't have a line item
in that budget because it is funded
through the grant and the tuition. So,
there's not even a a item that we can
discuss in your budget because there is
nothing in there for the prek program
because we save money by the program
that we have.
>> Correct. What Liz has referred to in the
past is that it would be her preference
to to charge preschool program to use
stuff in the building, staff members.
Um, she would want to take percentages
of our already existing costs and charge
the parents for that. And we don't do
that with any bill. We don't do that. We
don't do that with any program. Just
like honestly, there are programs at the
community center that guests come to
from other towns. Test doesn't say, "I'm
sorry, you don't live in Andover, so you
can't pay to have lunch here." I've been
there for lunches. It's a great program
and they have out oftowners that go
there. So, it would be unrealistic. It
would be unrealistic for us to say we're
going to start charging our own families
>> to a percentage to use existing
facilities. That would be me like
saying, "Rob, I know you want to use the
gym for a town meeting, but you've got
to pay me because it costs me."
>> For the record, I I never said that. For
the record, I never said that.
>> You did. You did say that you think that
the You did say that you think that the
extra classes for like the gym teacher
could be reduced and their salary could
be reduced if it wasn't for for
preschool. And that's not the case. That
was a full-time gym teacher when we had
two uh preschools. So, we didn't go
full-time because we all of a sudden had
four preschools. That did not happen.
So, thank you. I'll let you get back to
your meeting, Rob. So now, so because
you have had to increase to four
classrooms, you did not have to increase
any FTE for any specials.
>> Nope. As a matter of fact, the one thing
that I did have to increase a year and a
half ago was um speech services and we
hired uh a different person, Karen, and
paid her to do preschool speech
screenings and took it out of the
preschool budget. that was not a
responsibility of the current speech
teacher. So any of those extra things we
paid this year for enrichment um music,
not our music teacher, another person to
come in out of preschool uh grant funds.
We paid that person to come do
enrichment music for uh the preschool.
So those expenses get passed on to
preschool when they are preschool only
expenses.
And so there there would be no talk
about increasing tuition. I mean tuition
has been the same since further back
than 2019.
>> Yes.
>> Right now with the changes going on with
the state, we um currently receive with
early start uh which used to be school
readiness and smart start. We receive
$6,000 for each of those slots. They
have not told us what's going to happen
in a year or two with that program.
They've said that there's this like
checklist. Maybe those districts that
take out oftowners will receive more if
they have out oftowners. Maybe the
increase to the early start funds is
going to go from 6 to 10,000. Maybe the
smart start is going to go from 65,000
to a 100,000.
Maybe if you have more rooms rather than
less rooms and you can show that you can
check the checklist, there'll be
incentivization money. I sit on about
four meetings a month. I have one
tomorrow. Four meetings a month with OEC
and the state department of education as
well as the RESK as does my principal
and the team at AES. So, I can tell you
that we are following very closely all
of the changes that are occurring for
them to implement universal preschool.
And we are set up very nicely right now
that if there's any incentivization
money that's going to be offered because
our program is considered a benchmark
program because we are a model and we
are NYAK accredited with a 98.9%
rating. we will be eligible for that and
we're going to continue to maintain our
level of rigor and our level of um
success with our students so that we can
be eligible for more money um come 2728
school year.
>> Um all those things are great, but I'm
just going to sit there and and be the
bearer of bad news, but the federal
grants and the state grants are just not
guaranteed. I mean, the state of
Connecticut's going to lose a billion
dollars in federal.
>> That's not true. The state of
Connecticut listen. Come on, Valerie.
You just spotted You just spouted all
your
Hold on, everybody.
>> Just let me talk about it. And even if
my numbers aren't even if my numbers
aren't even close to being right.
>> You just saw in this distribution of
$270 million that our town of Andover
got 90 98.
It's a it's a joke. We have to prepare,
right? We have to understand that
there's there are constraints that we're
going after.
>> Now, I asked you specifically for the
number and I went into the last agenda
that's out there for the for the board
of of education and it says there's 187
current students in the school. And
Valerie, I I really want you to tell me
if my my logic is correct, right? And
you keep going all the way back to 2010
when I think we had let's see how many
kids do I have uh for for that period uh
students in K through six and currently
we have 189 and you keep comparing the
spending at that level and that that
that's a problem.
>> No,
>> that's what you're doing. Just I'm gonna
finish. I'm just gonna finish.
>> Yep.
>> Right. So I'll I'll go to a much shorter
span for everybody to understand what
has happened. So in the the year 2324
our actual spending was $3,789,000
on AAS. We took and put the difference
into I didn't but the board of finance
took the money and put it into the
capital fund. So the over the under
spend of $400 and some odd thousand went
into the capital fund, but that was your
spend $3,789.
You had 174 children in your class. And
currently we're asking your the board of
education is asking for $5,63,000.
And you've only gone up to 189 children.
That's 15 children. And that's a
$1,274,000
total increase in spending in a span of
three or four years for 15 children.
That totals $84,966
per child. That is unsustainable.
>> You're not comparing apples to apples.
>> How can I not be?
>> You are. You are. You love to take out
>> Those are your numbers, Valerie, not
mine.
>> My turn. My turn.
>> You love to take out the preschool
numbers. You said let's go back to 2023
uh and then 2010. First of all matter
>> I went it does matter. I went to 2015
when I did all of my comparisons this
year. That's a decade. From 2015 to 2020
the budget was cut $418,000
to quote rightsize it because the
enrollment was going down. We never got
back those people. We never got back
that money. And if you look at the
budget from 2015 to 2025, the total
increase was $244,000.
That's a real number. They can look it
up on on our website or the town
website. So that's that's the real
number, $244,000.
You also will reference oftent times,
Mr. Maguire, the actual expenditures,
and you will say, well, you had a
surplus that year that you put in the
capital account. We most certainly did
because we were responsible with fis
fiscally responsible with our overage. I
went to Robert and I said due to COVID
and ARPA money and all of the other
things. We didn't spend that money on
nothing. We didn't build a building. We
didn't do anything with that money. We
didn't hire staff like some towns did to
make it easier that we were going to
fall off a cliff and not be able to pay.
We went to the board of finance and said
we can put this money aside because we
have no capital account and it's the
right thing to do for taxpayers. So I do
resent that being thrown back in our
face where we took that money and we
were reasonable enough to say let's put
it aside for a rainy day for capital for
35 school road and at the time Robert
and Joanne Heert worked hard with that.
That is the reason why the bathroom is
not costing a penny to the taxpayers
more than that money was put in there.
So when grants can supplant instead of
supplement, we do and we do that well.
So then you can't look at the actuals
that year and say that's not fair
because the town side has an overage
every year as well.
>> And I don't have 57 funds to take money
out of. We're looking at a million
dollars this year alone funding those
funds. And I don't have that privilege.
So I just respectfully, Robert, and I'll
give you back your meeting. I think that
to cherrypick a couple of things like
I'm not an expert in the field, but I
think that you guys can go back to two
classrooms. That's not true. It's not
accurate. It would not even service all
of our Andover children to say I think
you added people for the sake of
preschool without telling us. That's not
true. You know, we added a fourth and a
fifth grade class. So there again, those
are two extra specials right there. So I
think we do need to get back to the
budget. I think we need to stop
attacking preschool. It is not a line
item in this budget. It isn't.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh well, just last last Rob Rob just one
thing. One thing one thing one thing
>> to hear.
>> There is 112
student just in in K through six
decrease from the year that the
superintendent references
112 students down. And the reason why I
focus on the prek superintendent Bruno
is because you have told me in multiple
years that it did not cost the taxpayers
of Andover any money. So I have to take
that out of the calculations because I
am taking you at your word that it does
not cost the taxpayers of Andover any
money. So, I focus on the K through six
because you have told me that it doesn't
cost us any money. So, I'm just letting
you all know we've lost 112 students and
in the last few years we've had a
significant spike in what you're you've
been allocating to the school. And if
you that's why you need your money.
That's why you need your information to
make these decisions because they're not
easy. When I arrived, there was 175
students.
>> All right.
>> You referenced 2010.
>> No, I did not. I
>> That's what you did.
>> 2015. Said it
>> 2015.
>> Okay. Now, can we bring this in? And
instead of having this back and forth
hearing a grievances, can we I want to
tighten this up, guys. This is
>> It's 9:38.
We have decisions to make.
I want to move to the part when we make
proposals.
>> All right.
>> I think Kim has a question.
>> I do have I do have
>> Go ahead.
>> Since I'm sorry since we're I'm not
sorry, but since we're on the subject of
a big um no there there's been a couple
of things that have been brought to my
attention and I I do want to ask Valerie
um for our little kids, you have
three-year-olds and foury olds and I
noticed in your you know your handbook,
how do the
Um, how are how are the three-year-olds
funded for like lunch and stuff like
that? Do their moms and dads bring in
their food? Do they buy food at the
school?
>> Their moms and dads bring it in. And if
if the school does provide things like
snacks, the snacks are charged from
Coventry Food Service directly to the
prek account.
>> Okay?
>> The bill comes in and it's paid from the
prek account. I assure you that you are
not paying for their lunches.
>> Okay. And and our our also our three and
four year olds transportation.
Do they ride a bus? I haven't finished
my question. Please don't interrupt me.
>> Do they ride a bus? Do they come in on
their moms and dad's vehicles? How are
the three and four year olds for our
prek program getting back and forth to
the school? And then so what happens
with them at 3:00 when they're our kids
getting ready to leave for the day and
their moms and dad, do they pick them
up? Like how does that work?
>> Just like every other kid in the
building, their parents pick them up. Um
our our children that are under five
years old are are not allowed to ride
the bus. So So
>> there's no no prek kids on the andor
school buses. How about the vans?
What do you mean the vans?
>> Well, there's they're smaller, but
>> No, the only we the only special the
only vans we have are special ed
transportation.
>> We don't have vans to take people home.
Only special ed transportation.
>> So, no prek kids are on our buses.
>> I I just said anybody under the age of
five is not allowed to ride the bus.
>> PreK kid who has not doesn't qualify for
kindergarten. Maybe
>> that that is a possibility. If somebody
is 5 years old, they can ride a bus. But
nobody under the age of five can. So if
you had a preker that turned five this
month and the parent said, "Could I ride
the bus?" They'd have to be an Andover
resident, of course. But would Taylor
say yes if they were five? She probably
would. Yes, because then they're legally
allowed to ride the bus. But obviously
our buses only stop in Andover, so they
would be an Andover resident.
Okay. Okay. I just I I've noticed that
there's a big jump in transportation. Um
and I'm not equating it to that. I'm
trying to sort it out myself. Thank you.
>> Oh, you're right. The bus.
>> Okay.
>> Do we have any further questions or can
we move to
the part where we talk about adjusting
the AAS budget line?
All right.
Why don't we do that?
Now,
you were building towards something.
>> Um,
>> I was I was
>> So, if I wanted to continue and and if
you have a motion you want to make, I
have thoughts. I have I don't just don't
want to dominate the discussion. I'm I'm
trying to chair the meeting here and I I
certainly have a figure in my head, but
you know, I want to hear what others
think.
So, I have been waiting and have asked a
couple of times for that aggregate
number that we asked for um for what it
costs for
um the benefits and Medicare and stuff
for the preschool portion of it and
haven't gotten that. Um
so, I kind of was doing my calculation.
Um, I'll take out the other items
because there's no other way to do it
because I can't get the numbers that
I've asked for.
Um,
it looks like there could be
$313,000
in expenses
for Let me take that one off
for benefits and whatnot tied to the
preschool.
Just I don't know. It's just a point.
Just a point, I guess. I don't know.
Rob, why don't you go,
>> so
again, we still have to talk about fund
balance, but we're talking about EES
right now. My end goal here,
I was thinking, can we get somewhere
between, you know, three and a half and
four
for the tax increase from from the 6.7
we presented?
And if we were to cut
50,000
out of AES
and use 100,000 in fund balance, right,
you'd then be, you know, you'd be at
360,
sorry, 313, I think. Um, something along
those lines. And that's a, you know,
about 3.1% reduction. That gets you to
4.6.
It's so not quite there. So, I was
thinking
I was thinking that and talk about fund
balance and then do the math, see where
we're at. You know, I'm not saying it's
the it's the end game, but I I wanted to
see what it did.
Uh I feel like if we cut them more on
top of
of that, I I worry that
we could, you know, start to run into
trouble. So I know that there are people
members of the board who would probably
think that's light. I understand that.
That's my starting figure. That's where
I think I think is the right answer. I
think if you if you look at the mod the
very modest cut that we made to the town
side and you look at the advisory
questions
which again you know both were deemed
too high. More people said school is too
high. Yes. But both came in with hey
this is too high. So my thought is cut
the cuts should be kind of measure it
with those numbers, right? And if we're
making a $16,000 cut
uh to the town side, you know, 50 is
actually significantly more than that on
the school side. So that's that's my
thought. That is my thought. My thought
is 50.
>> What's that percentage, Rob?
>> What's the percentage?
>> Well, in terms of in terms of the
overall budget,
>> no
percentage decrease.
Okay. Well, they're asking for about a
500,000. It's just shy a $500,000
increase, right? And that's that's your
11%. So, that that would take it down
to, you know, 450.
>> Mhm.
>> Right. So, it would be um more like a
10% increase than than a 11% increase.
>> I don't think that's going to fly.
>> I mean, I could do the math. I mean, I
can do the math if you want. Five, you
know, 50.
>> I don't really think that's enough. I
mean, it was pretty clear what the the
town people have said. I really think we
need to go lower.
>> I think it was pretty even between the
town budget and the AES budget. How
about we ask AES to come back with the
same 164 we did
>> 16,000?
>> Yeah, it's the same amount we cut our
budget.
>> Yeah, but you can't increase
>> our budget increase was not as huge as
theirs. So, it's not really
>> It's not clear. That's That's not even
>> It's not apples to apples that
>> Yeah, I disagree with that. Yeah. And it
is not apples to apples.
>> I I'm just saying I I my fear is um and
uh Superintendent Bruno was nice enough
to give me a tour of the school. When I
first started, I was looking through the
line items and I was looking through the
things and the school's decisions. I
think the board has done all the
assessment and made the right calls for
what we needed. My fear is if we keep
kicking the can with the school budget,
eventually it's going to compound and
it's going to be a bigger problem. Um,
and I I just that's my thought on it.
So, I'm wondering if like we go just to
show fairness, we do the same 168 for
them that we did for us. I I I hear what
you're saying there, but I I have to
agree with Liz that I hate to say this,
Valerie, but you're looking at
um the AES assets three times what the
town is. So, if the town cuts 16,000,
you'd have to ask for at least three
times that to be if you were talking
about being equal, which is about
$50,000. Rob, thank you. But so it does
have to be proportionate to Liz's point.
You you can't just say 16,000 Rob
because that I mean not Rob Nick because
that's not proportionate. You know what
I'm saying? You're looking at 11%
increase versus a I don't know 3 or 4%
increase. So I do think you have to kind
of make it proportionate.
>> Right. I've pulled up just for
everybody's certification again the
advisory questions. You can see the
differences. you see a lot of just, you
know, the just right numbers are
actually pretty similar. Uh but the too
high, you know, Andover education budget
was was deemed a little too high and the
andover town budget was deemed a little
too high. So, I look at this and I say,
"Okay, yes, in consideration of the fact
that, you know, we're looking we're
we're dealing with an 11% increased
request and that advisory question
number was a little higher. I'm trying
to do something that I'm trying to kind
of mix and match that all together and
come up with a number that seems
equitable and I I arrived at 50. Your
mileage may vary."
That's my thought. Um, if if and I'm
happy to make that motion, but I you
know, I know I know that there are those
of you on the board who disagree and if
you want to make your motions, we can we
can review and discuss. I don't you
know, I'm not trying to ram through what
I want. So, that's but that's my
thinking, guys. I'm looking at the
advisory questions. I'm looking at what
we did on the town side. I'm looking at,
hey, we're getting the state aid money.
We're getting the 49,000 back from the
2425 budget. I'm looking at all those
moving parts and I think if we did 50,
you know, that gets us into a much more
reasonable tax increase range. I'd still
want to do the math on the other
spreadsheet and get the exact number.
Um, but I mean, I think it would get us
down um into a much better place. So
that's my thought. But if I'm willing I
think we need to we're pushing 10:00
here. So we need to make decisions. We
need to make motions. We need to
proceed.
>> So I feel
>> actually can I Yeah. Let me I feel going
that um going from 11 to 10 is not going
to make it with the town and we're going
to be back here again after spending
more thousands of dollars going through
another referendum. We have to find out
something that's we feel is going to be
something that the town is going to
accept
>> and I don't think 10 is going to make
it.
>> So go ahead.
>> Did you consider the money that we the
100,000 and the 50,000 or the
right we had the money that the board
got from additional education and the
money that they gave us back the 50,000.
>> So can I make some
>> if you add that in there as well then
you're reducing the budget that much
more. So
>> that makes sense.
>> I totally get what you're saying, Bill,
but
>> I'm just
>> 58%
of the voters didn't know about that
money that was going to come in. We know
because we're on the board of finance,
>> right?
>> Okay.
>> We found out really late. We found out
right before
>> Can I finish? So,
>> sorry. I didn't mean to interrupt. I
apologize.
>> I I understand, Robin. We're all tired.
I am, too. I have to work tomorrow. So,
I feel like as a board of finance member
that I need to kind of narrow my
thoughts down to what they knew when
they voted. And the vote was 58% felt
that it was too high.
And
I also checked in with Wally Barton, and
I'm going to quote him. He's not on the
meeting. Sorry. Um 25,000 bucks it costs
us each time we go through these votes
and everything. And then there's another
$500 for the clerk mailer. So that's the
that's 3,000 bucks for the voting.
>> And then there is
um the fact that most people that I've
communicated with before
we even got to this point were
completely
shocked at even putting up the 7.5%
So most people are saying I would really
like to see 2 to 4%.
So I'm just telling you
what people are communicating to me as a
board of finance member and I'm I'm
trying to compare what I'm trying to do
is compare apples to apples.
And again, the 456 number is
what our taxpayers told us
before the,
you know, the discounted dollars were
showing up,
>> right?
>> I think that we are going to have
problems if we
don't listen. We're gonna go back.
>> Can I add to that? Can I add to that,
Kim?
>> Of course. I'm finished.
>> Um, I don't want to stop you.
wanted to add that it we can play with
the the numbers and grants and all we
can, but what what it boils down to is
the expenditures
and these expenditures are going to be
permanent,
right? They're they're going to be
permanent. I mean, we're over pushing
over a $5 million budget now. You know,
it's kind of it's a lot for a tiny
school. And
I think people are getting scared with
that. So I I agree with what you're
saying, Kim. Um
I think we need to look at the
expenditures. That's all. So
>> So I want to circle back to that too
because
I also look at the fact that there is
that large amount of money going from
the taxpayers, but we also the school's
also receiving a substantial amount of
money in state grants.
Um, and they should. It's awesome. I
think it's great. But it's still a large
amount of money going into the school
budget. There are federal grants that go
into the school's budget. Um, which I
don't know. I dug around to try to
figure that out. There's the tuition
from the prek
that they're getting. Um, they have that
capital account, which they should have.
They're probably not going to spend all
of that on that bathroom, but it's also
a really nice buffer if something were
to happen at the school. They would have
some of that money to use for a
substantial project. They've got it.
It's theirs.
It's it's in their control. We we kind
of talk about it, but we know they could
have it. They've also got that 2%
non-lapsing account, which every year is
going to be replenished.
So,
>> it's not this year. They're drawing down
from it this year, guys.
>> They're going to draw down from it, but
I do believe that they're gonna it's
going to be replenished. They don't have
the money. That's it. Just just point of
order and then I'll let you finish. I
don't mean to I'm sorry. I just have the
information. My understanding is they're
going to be putting in 87,000 in change
from the 2425 year and they're drawing
down, I believe, 97,000 for this fiscal
year. So, it nets out to about a $10,000
reduction. Uh it's not being fully
replenished, but it's it's closeish.
Correct.
>> But but it's still I'm trying to say
that
>> I don't I I'm not trying to hurt kids
or, you know, make any bad decisions
here. But I I do think that we need to
look at like this huge picture of what
is going on.
And it's bigger than what the taxpayers
know. It's what I know. I've looked at
the budget
and that's all I'm going to say. Thank
you.
>> I I still think, Kim, that we have to
consider the amount of money that we did
get in additional. Yes, the town is
going to receive that benefit that the
budget is going to come down that much
more based on that $150,000.
If we take another $50,000 out of their
budget, that's $200,000 the taxpayer is
going to benefit from.
>> I understand that, Bill. But I also
think that my responsibility here is to
make sure that we explain everything to
everyone
>> and we listen to them. And I get a lot
of comments
from our taxpayers
and I'm trying to make sure that I
convey that to all of you.
and that we represent the taxpayers and
our children.
>> It's very important that they receive
the best education we can give them. But
there is a big picture that our
taxpayers
don't see those accounts.
You know what I'm saying? We know more.
>> Yeah, we do.
>> I don't disagree with you and I I I
continue. never going to get anybody who
who doesn't love kids
>> more um you know I'd love more
information in this budget I I worked on
the presentation for a reason to to
provide more information I'm always in
that vein so I agree with you Kim what I
would really like to do though board
members is take action
um you know what my thought is
>> some of you disagree with it I
completely understand that I am totally
unsurprised that's fine I'd like to have
motions here uh and and and move
forward. If you want me to make mine,
I'll lead off. That's fine. But I
generally like to, you know, let you
guys have a crack at things and and
then, you know, and then if I have
thoughts. So,
>> make a motion
the end over elementary school budget by
$50,000.
>> Bill moves to reduce AES 50,000.
I'll second it.
>> All right.
We've talked. If if you have more
comments, I won't shut them down, but we
we've talked a lot. I'd like to just go
ahead and vote on it.
>> Um I just want to make one comment.
>> Go ahead, Liz.
>> Um I just want to point out the fact uh
this money that uh we're getting from
the state, you know, for the town and
for AES. This is a one-time thing. This
is not money that's going to Yeah. Just
I want to make sure everybody is aware.
Everybody should be clear that it is not
it's a oneshot thing as far as we know
unless they go and they do it again. It
is not teed up as a permanent increase
to our ECS funding. That is correct.
And it's it's that's that's an important
consideration. You should you realize
it's not ongoing revenue.
Everybody clear on that one?
>> Yes.
>> Okay.
>> Important. Thank you, Liz, for bringing
that up. I I I thought in my spiel I I
probably missed I I added in my notes to
to mention that as well.
Okay. So, I'm just going to go through
and we'll take a vote and we'll see
where it lands. Liz,
>> no.
>> You're no. All right, Heather.
>> Um,
I'm going to say yes.
>> Okay, Kim.
>> No. Nope. Uh, Bill,
>> yes.
>> Nick,
>> And Louise.
>> Louise. Sorry, I'm I'm scrolling
through. Louise,
>> no.
>> Is a no. And I am a yes.
So, that would be four to three. Motion
carries to reduce by 50,000. And I'm
going to get this note correct. Reduce.
We're going to be right back here.
>> Absolutely.
>> Another 25. Another 25,000 to the to the
town
>> wasted.
>> I thought it was 3,000, but yes. Okay.
If that's
>> I thought it was 25.
>> I I got confused in there. I thought it
was 2500 plus 500 equals 3,000. But
>> it's 2500 plus
>> Oh, I'm sorry.
>> 500 for um mailer.
>> It's not nothing, but it's thankfully
not $25,000 a pop.
>> Yeah. Okay.
>> Uh No, no worries. No worries. We just
want to get it accurate. So, so that
does that. Now,
I we we still have to the last component
here would be if people are willing to
talk about use of fund balance. I'm
going to get rid of this. This is all
junk. Um use of fund balance. Again,
it's the same issue that Liz rightfully
points out. When we do something like
this, it's a oneshot thing. If you dip
into that savings of hours to offset
something, you know, it's not ongoing
revenue. You're doing it once, but I
think it's appropriate. I mean, we did
190 last year. We did zero going into
town meeting when this budget was
rejected. I think we're in a good fiscal
position. I think we can absorb 100,000
out of that that fund and be okay. And I
think it's reasonable to do it. So,
that's my proposal. I want to hear
before we, you know, go ahead and make
motions if anybody has strong feelings
one way or the other about higher,
lower,
not using it at all. You know, where's
the rest of the board on that one?
>> I think it's smart to use.
>> I do, too. I'd like to see the 100,000
All right. In the interest of of not
being on here till midnight, um I'll
just go ahead and make the motion and we
can discuss. Uh I'm going to move that
we use $100,000 in unassigned fund
balance
uh to help offset the tax increase in
the budget. Lisa, by the way, just out
of curiosity,
we we would put that on the other chart.
We don't really have a line on this
chart for that, do we? We We had it
somewhere. I feel like And I don't think
it's here. I think it's on the other
chart. Is that correct?
>> What are you talking about for ch
>> use of fund balance? So, like for
instance, I know it was here. Um,
last year we used 190 and this year we
didn't. Yeah. Here it is.
>> Right here.
>> Yeah.
>> Right.
>> Yep.
>> Okay. So, right now is there. So, this
we don't really have it on this chart.
Correct.
>> Correct.
>> Okay. I just want to be sure I'm doing
it right.
>> Yeah.
>> All right. So that my mo that's my
motion. Do I have a second on that?
>> I'll second it.
>> Okay.
Do we want to discuss? Anybody have any
more thoughts on that?
All right. We'll take a vote. Liz,
>> I don't know. I'm thinking about it.
>> Okay. I'll come back to you. No problem.
Kim,
>> no.
>> Kim's a no. Louise,
>> No. Okay.
Um, Nick,
>> yes.
>> Uh, Bill,
>> Okay. Uh, Heather,
>> yes.
>> Is a yes.
Alisum,
>> yeah, I'm going to say no.
>> You're going to say no.
>> All right. Um, it's my motion. I'm
voting yes. Um, that's 4 to three. We'll
use 100,000. So now what I need to do um
is get this this chart updated and see
what we've done. What have we
accomplished
tonight?
Um
and you're you're taking this down too,
Lisa, right? As we go.
>> I'm trying.
>> All right. And now what I need
>> I definitely got the budget down. Yes,
>> these charts are not of course linked
it before before we do this next year.
Good lord, we got to get these back
together, these two charts because they
used to be one chart and you would
propagate over and it was so much
easier. Um my apologies for ranting, but
it it was a lot easier and and it made
errors a little less likely.
So that's the AAS change.
Now RAM expansion. By the way, everybody
remember we are we're going to get
something on off the RAM levy. We just
don't know what.
All right. Um
municipal budget.
Where is Oh, and we need to get on here.
the revenueing well not revenue but the
you know the the additional special co
uh stuff
so if I'm if my notes are correct we did
50 off AAS 16.4 four off the town 100
from fund balance and we have the
in one shot I don't know what you want
to call it revenue and it's not really
revenue but you know the state aid
>> and then the 49,000 from
>> and the 49,000 right thank you Bill that
AA as uh will return for fiscal year 25
so that total
And I want to get the 98 number correct.
It's it's it's actually 97 and change.
Right.
It's eight here. Let's get it right.
801 192 and then we put the other one in
here plus 17
7. All right. So the net here is 313343.
That's what I've got between additional
aid and cuts and use of fund balance.
That's the difference.
All right. So just quick and dirty.
If we take
amount to be raised by taxation, we take
this number. I I'm not going to fix this
entire spreadsheet tonight because
frankly I don't I want Lisa to to do it
and and me to check it and
>> yes,
>> I I don't
>> I agree.
>> Right. Yeah.
>> Um, so H.
So if we if I just if I take this down.
H, that didn't work. All right.
Um,
we can probably have Lisa do this.
>> Sorry. offline. I know, but I wanted to
to show people
>> my only point still have to go through
public speak at the end of this and it's
already 10 o'clock here.
>> I know
>> Rob, what was your calculation? You said
by 100,000 in cuts would cut down. Could
you use that just as a brief one until
we can get a positive figure? You know
what I'm saying? Give people an
estimation with what you were saying
earlier. I don't I don't know.
>> It's just a thought.
Yeah, I mean 3 313 I mean that's that's
a 3.1% reduction off of 6.7. So it
should get you to 3.6 and I'm
calculating 3.58
blah blah blah. So yeah, we're about
3.6% in tax increase now.
We're down 3%. A little bit more than
3%. That's that checks out. I just
wanted to make sure it checked out so
that I'm not talking
>> crazy. Exactly. Not talking trash. Um,
so yes, we are roughly at that. I
strongly suspect that that would duck us
under the
uh the auto mill rate issue and we back
to be back to one simple mill rate which
would be easier to explain to the public
as well.
Um, okay.
Unless there is further board
discussion, I do think we should move on
to public speak. We again have a lot of
people to get through. So, I'll just
repeat what I said the first time
around. I'm going to stop sharing
actually. Hang on a minute.
Just try to keep it tight, people. Try
to, you know, agree, disagree, have
comments, but just try to keep it tight.
>> Should be a minute.
>> Okay. Uh, let's see. Well, Lisa, you're
first up, but you're you've been
involved. I don't know.
>> Yeah. Nope. I I'm gonna just keep
watching.
>> Okay. Uh Anna,
>> I just wanted to express that um when we
go to vote again, I will be voting no
as a town resident.
>> Okay,
>> Kate.
Hi. Yeah. I just want to thank you guys
for the time that you've taken to commit
to this tonight and for serving our
town. Have a good night.
>> Thank you.
>> Thank you,
>> Diane.
>> Just um a point of clarification that I
wanted to say.
I do hope you guys remember that if I
read the new charter correctly, when we
go back to referendum, it's going to be
a bifurcated budget. So you just really
all you achieved is
>> are showing the school budget as still a
10% increase. It is not going to fly.
You you know just doing the percentage
tax increase means nothing to the
taxpayer. They want to know what their
mill rate is and what the expense
increase is for the town. I think you
did what you can on the town. There's no
more fat in that town budget, but you
did not do that for the school and it's
go and so we're gonna have a town budget
that passes and we're gonna have a
school budget that we're going to have a
big problem with. So, you should really
consider that.
Thank you,
>> Elizabeth Partridge.
>> Uh yeah, I I agree with Diane on this.
Um, I did think that it was interesting
that uh when you went to the town, they
bas talked about the town budget. They
said basically, "Okay, well, whatever it
happens to be, we'll make it work." And
um I laughed that we won't see that out
of the uh the board of ed. Um they dug
their heels in and they still refused to
uh give complete information. The other
piece that was never brought up was that
um that the school has all these solar
panels on top of the roof and that we
were told that that would cut their um
electricity bill in half right there.
There's $15,000 worth of savings that
nobody went after.
And I think you're going to see you're
going to be be right back where you were
before.
Eric.
>> Yeah. Um I will be voting yes in this
budget. Um Rob and Bill, I want to thank
you for your um leadership during this
meeting. It was um great that you kind
of took charge and actually kind of met
in the middle. Like I requested at the
beginning of my public comment. A few of
you I'd like to I don't really like your
attitudes on the board. So I would um
kind of fix that. uh Elizabeth Partridge
for your um reply to my first public
comment. You are actually playing $70
less this year than you were three years
ago. So, thank you.
>> All right. One thing I would like to
tighten up on is, you know, let's not
have back back and forth between the
public comments. All right. Um Jen
McColder.
>> Yes. I just wanted to thank the board of
um board of finance, especially your
comments um that there's nothing more
important than educating our children.
And I could not agree more. So, thank
you,
>> Joanne.
Oh, sorry. Um, well, all right. We'll do
Joan. I'll go back to Jenny Morel.
Sorry.
>> Okay. I just wanted to say that um I
expected a little more work to be done
tonight. you know, based on I knew all
of you I had gone to all of your
meetings and I knew you were waiting to
hear from the public and they really
made it pretty clear and I agree with
some of you that again that I've tried
to make this point again. It's the
expenses that matter. It's not the
artificially bringing it down for one
year. I just always tried to keep myself
impartial at these things and you know
it's hard to but you have to listen to
what the people say. So a lot of this is
on the expenses and really there was a
tiny bit of work done on the expenses
when you know a couple things could have
happened you easily I was looking back
in the balances like that are in I know
it's a sore subject but these are bank
accounts that are there and have large
amounts you know our road improvement
fund could have taken a $50,000
hit this year um I know you know and
still had a huge balance it still has
the town aid road Maybe another one
could have, you know, reduced just
20,000. Again, there's big balances. Not
the ones that pay for leases, not the
ones that are spoken for, but a lot of
work has been done in the town. We've
given a lot of, you know, so to come on
and be ready to, you know, I figured you
guys were ready to go. I mean, this is
what it is. And luckily, that extra
state money, which I read about, is
coming in to help with education. That's
great. um and you know you reduce
16,0004
and then whatever's coming back and
thank goodness you decided to use the
fund balance but I just feel let down
for the taxpayers that were looking at
the budgets to be reduced not let's
artificially bring it down but it is
what it is thank you for all the hard
times at the meetings and I just thought
a little more could have been done
that's all
>> understood Joanne uh Jenny Morell
Hello. Um, I'd like to um just extend my
appreciation for the very very hard work
that you are all going through. Um, to
reference a couple comments that were
made. Um, I appreciated also somebody
had quoted saying um, we're going to go
to the experts and it was good to see
that you were willing to go to, um, Val
to, you know, get her expertise on
something to help you make your
decisions. Um, and also, you know, no
matter what happens, I think on the the
school side, the town side, we will all
make it work um with whatever decision
comes out. So, thank you again for your
work.
>> Christina Frasier,
>> no comment. Thank you.
>> Katie Dixon,
>> thank you for your hard work.
>> Matthew Hagerty,
>> I appreciate everything. Good, good work
tonight, guys. Thank you.
Um Melissa,
>> um I appreciate hard work of looking at
the budget and I also appreciate those
of you that were looking to um look at
the budget through a fair lens. So thank
you.
>> Uh Marcy,
>> I have no comment.
>> Thank you. Um I'm sorry. I forgotten who
the Samsung is again.
Uh, hi Dave Tibido. Um,
>> yes,
>> I I guess I I mean I I'm in line with a
lot of the folks online here with uh I
guess I expect a little more from the
town budget, but just curious why the
benefits section got passed over so
quickly. I I it went by so fast. I
thought it was in the $700,000
level. So, I'm not quite sure, you know,
what the town benefits are, but um you
know, seemed like that might have been
an opportunity. Um the other thing
>> I'm not sure when like when the uh ram
budget gets decided or whatever,
>> how will we know how it affected the
town budget?
>> Yeah. So all right let me take your
questions in turn. Um the first question
the benefits line basically those are
some of that's contractual. It's all
basically governed by you know what we
have for employees taking insurance plus
the employees get payments in those who
do not take the insurance get payments
in lie of um taking the healthcare
insurance. And we have a huge spike in
the healthcare premium this year um in
the consortium we're in. It's like a 21%
increase. So we needed to have enough
money in that line item to a pay the the
the direct premium cost for the
employees who do take the insurance and
then the the contracts for the people
who get payments in lie of it's tied to
a benchmark of I believe a it's like 50%
of the cost of a single plan. So it
basically it all kind of has to go up.
We we needed to make sure and I worked
on this with Lisa. The reason I sped
past it, it was I think we kind of been
over this in multiple meetings where we
wanted to make sure we had enough in
there to to cover those costs. And I'm
pretty sure that number is is right.
>> The second pay 100% of the cost.
>> No, no, no. I think that's Well, that's
the town side cost, right?
>> Okay. Okay.
>> Yeah.
>> The employees contribute.
>> Yeah. Okay.
>> I don't know off the top of my head what
the contribution is.
>> Yep.
>> I know at my work I pay 30% or
something.
>> Yeah. Yeah, just curious less for
municipal employees. So, um
>> I'm sorry. The the second question was
RAM. So, they have their meeting Tuesday
night. That's the same time as we're
doing our presentation at our town
meeting. Now, our town meeting, frankly,
it's for review and discussion and then
the two budgets go to referendum
and that's that. Um so, the RAM the RAM
meeting, you might say, is is actually
more important. They're going to do what
they're going to do. Then we're going to
vote
um on the May 26th. By by then, we
should know what Ram did.
>> Um
>> okay, that'll be posted somewhere.
>> I can try to make sure we post something
to explain that. Uh I'm sure also the
Riverista probably reach out and ask
what the impact would be on us. Um I
I've been back and forth with them. Uh
but I I'll try to make sure that we try
to communicate that as well as we can to
the public in advance of the vote. Um
yeah, and then if we if we that'll
affect our mill rate calculation and we
of course only set the mill rate uh once
the budget is budgets are passed, we
know what we're spending,
>> right? Yeah. Okay. Thank you.
>> Rob, just as a quick information, the
both votes are still on are on May 26th.
So as a town, we will be in referendum
for all the budgets on May 26th. So
>> right,
>> we won't know RAM until we vote on it.
>> That's true. What I mean, what I'm
sorry, what I'm saying is the proposal
for whatever the RAM board of ed does in
response to the the what happened.
>> Understood.
>> Yep. Uh okay. Uh Shannon,
>> first of all, um thank you very very
much for all of your hard work and
discussion tonight. Um I greatly
appreciate it. I just want to make uh
two points. One is
I believe that the town somewhat forgets
that two or three years ago we gave the
town budget a 16% increase. So, it's not
surprising that the town budget doesn't
need an incredible amount of increase.
Why Andover Elementary School needs it
is for all the reasons that you already
know and we don't need to elaborate on
it, but let's remember that the town got
a 16% increase. And at that point, we
relied on the expertise of the board of
selectmen who said, "We need that. I
really wish people would rely on the
expertise of our superintendent and the
work that the board of education does in
telling you the budget that we need. The
second thing is um I appreciate what was
said, but I do believe that people do
need to focus on the amount of the tax
increase and not just get overwhelmed by
a 10% increase for the school budget. We
didn't get overwhelmed by a 16% increase
for the town. I hope that that people
will focus on the resulting cost out of
their pocket. Thanks very much and
thanks again for all of your work.
>> Um Tess, I see you joined us. You have
public comment for us.
>> I do not. Thank you.
>> Thank you, Val.
>> Hi. Um, yes, just to piggy back off of
of what Shannon said, um, yes, you know,
there have been other times that that we
have needed to do this for the town. I
can tell you that because thanks to you
guys tonight, because hopefully we will
not have to kick the can another year.
Next year when we have this
conversation, we won't be recovering
from years earlier and we should be in a
situation where we've gone through that
recovery. As far as insurance, one of
the gentlemen brought up insurance. Just
a reminder for us, that's such a large
number in terms of we have many many
more employees than the town side. So,
that's was a really huge um thing. I
appreciate you looking at the bottom
line because the goal is the the balance
on the bottom that for it to be that 3.7
as you mentioned or something lower um
than than what was originally presented.
And so I appreciate that it was
equitable in terms of not trying to
balance the budget completely on the
backs of children. And the one last
thing is um Betty brought up the solar
um it was live as of this past month and
so um we are only two weeks into
creating power and we look forward to
sharing that with the community as we
move forward because yes, next year's
budget we should see some savings as a
result of it since it just went live.
Thank you.
Leanne.
>> Yes. Um, I'm glad that Diane brought up
the idea about bifurcation. I've been
reading the charter. Um, it didn't come
up earlier and I've been reading the
charter during the meeting and I am in
favor of having this as a tool. I think
it's appropriate. So, I'm glad it was um
brought up and um I think it's it's
going to be a good tool.
>> Yep. that's been in there since the last
charter revision in um I think it was
late 20 24 that we put that through.
That is that's relatively new to the
town. Some of you may remember it. Um I
think we've only had it happen once. I
think it happened last year. Um so it is
definitely new and and you know for
those of you who haven't been through it
before, it's a little bit of a change.
Okay, I think I got everyone. If there's
anybody on here that I did not call for
public speak, now's your time. I
apologize if I missed you. I just I
think I went through everyone. Anybody?
All right. I'd like to entertain a
motion to adjurnn.
>> Motion to adjurnn.
>> Bill moves to adjurnn. Any second?
>> Second.
>> Liz seconds.
All right, I'll go around the board. Uh,
Heather,
>> yes.
>> I'm a yes. Bill,
>> Liz,
>> yes.
>> Kim,
>> Nick,
>> yes.
>> Luis,
>> Huzzah. We are journed. Thank you all
for your work. We hope the best. I will
see you all soon. Thank you.
>> Take care.